sip-031 initial draft submission (#214)
stacksgov/sips: sips/sip-031/sip-031.md

### Technical Implementation
A new Epoch 3.2 will manage the emission of the new tokens and its schedule. To facilitate mints and transfers, Epoch 3.2 relies on a boot contract exposing:

* A public function `update-recipient` that allows setting the `recipient`. The principal set in this smart contract will be the designated recipient of the initial 100M STX (minted at the Epoch 3.2 transition), the recipient of the unlockings for the second 100M STX over ~24 months, and the recipient of the 300M STX transferred over ~60 months (at each tenure).
* A read-only function `get-recipient` returning the current principal (set with `update-recipient`).

> * A public function, `claim`, that transfers all STX unlocked at the current burnchain height to the recipient and shall return the transferred amount.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A public function, `claim`, that transfers all STX unlocked at the current burnchain height to the recipient and shall return the transferred amount when called by `recipient`.
```

# Preamble

SIP Number: 031

Title: SIP-031: Five-Year Stacks Growth Emissions

Author(s):
- Mitchell Cuevas (mitchell@stacks.org)
- Alex Miller (alex@hiro.so)
- Tycho Onnasch (tycho@zestprotocol.com)
- Jakob Schillinger (jakob@hermetica.fi)
- Andre Serrano (andre@bitcoinl2labs.com)
- Dylan Floyd (dylan@bitflow.finance)

Consideration: Economic, Governance, Technical

> Type: Consensus (hard fork)

Reviewer 2: Per SIP-000, Consensus-type SIPs must include "Layer".

```suggestion
Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
```

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't get rid of `Type`completely.

* The "`Layer`" field has not been use to express type of SIP.
If you look at any key SIPs such as [SIP-015](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-015/sip-015-network-upgrade.md), [SIP-021](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-021/sip-021-nakamoto.md), [SIP-29](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-029/sip-029-halving-alignment.md) (the closest equivalent), we've always, even [SIP-000](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-000/sip-000-stacks-improvement-proposal-process.md) itself also uses the word "Type"

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca3434e9-df23-4240-a2c8-1ecd4bf629ad" width=70% height=70%>

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/297d051f-3f16-4cce-843d-4ae1f6fb9b51" width=60% height=60%>

Perhaps what the "`Layer`" (optional field to express additional information) was meant for but haven't been used yet, could express deeper evel what that Type is referred to. 

* I think if we want to follow past format, writing Consensus and removing the `(hard fork)` wording would make sense. 

Such as:
```
Type: Consensus

Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
```

* Then we should probaby match SIP-029 and past Consensus SIPs to add `Layer `field to match the new format going forward
<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dd287fde-d575-4b92-97a3-377a1d76d241" width=60% height=60%>

Any thought @wileyj ?

This proposal identifies opportunities to streamline key ecosystem operations while preserving essential checks and balances, ensuring the continued benefits of decentralization. Some of the measures in place to ensure the ecosystem remains decentralized include:

* The technical operation of the blockchain is still fully decentralized based on the participation of miners and signers.  
* No one party has unique ownership or control to make changes to the blockchain and the code remains open-source and owned by the community.  
* The blockchain will still be governed by the same process administered by the Stacks Foundation and dependent on what miners and signers choose to do.  
* To further ensure the open governance process, the Stacks Endowment will not vote its tokens during SIP votes.  
* This SIP does not confer any unique protocol governance or technical decision-making capabilities to the new operational entity; its existence is merely as a contributor to the ecosystem with an explicit focus to de-duplicate back-end effort required to support development.

# Specification

## The Stacks Endowment

> This SIP calls for the creation of a new consolidated ecosystem Endowment which will be funded through a combination of STX transfers from existing entities and people, a one-time mint of 100m STX to provide initial working capital (that is, STX deployed by the Endowment but not released onto the open market), and build a longer term treasury through new emissions over the next 5 years that temporarily bring Stacks’ annual emissions from 3.52% to an average of 5.75% per year. This target was chosen by first estimating the total resources necessary to achieve the stated objectives in this SIP over the first 5 years of the Endowment (both STX and USD denominated amounts) based on comparisons to other Top 50 crypto ecosystems. Next, an economic report from a third party research firm (details and a link to the report are below) was commissioned to identify the likely value of the STX based on several different scenarios. Finally, the approximate number of STX needed, based on the likely value of the tokens to be converted, to meet the resourcing needs estimated.

Reviewer 4: The timing isn't clear here for me - when are the 5-year emissions planned to start relative to the one-time mint? I think adding a timeline would help readers understand the sequence of events.

Reviewer 5: The 5 year emission schedule is laid out with exact bitcoin block heights in the specification section

* **Working Capital: 27%** Working capital describes capital that is intended to be actively deployed, but not permanently spent. This may include capital liquidity provisioning, a Stacks Memecoin Fund, direct deployments into Stacks DeFi, and allocations to deals that require a certain capital allocation to incentivize integration into the Stacks ecosystem.

#### Benefits To Builders

> With the majority of the Endowment dedicated to empowering builders of all sizes and fueling growth. To provide more specific examples, Stackers can expect to see activities like the following supported by this new endowment (in no particular order):

Reviewer 4: The first sentence is incomplete - it starts with 'With...' but doesn't complete the idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The majority of the Endowment shall be dedicated to empowering builders of all sizes and fueling growth. To provide more specific examples, Stackers can expect to see activities like the following supported by this new endowment (in no particular order):
```

* **Grants and bounties** for protocol/app development: These initiatives will directly fund developers building new protocols, applications, and tools that expand the capabilities of the Stacks ecosystem. These grants will cover the entire spectrum of the builder journey, in terms of size, stage, resource needs, and focuses.

> * **Community Grants:** In addition to critical bounties (for needs identified by roadmap priorities), community engagement and marketing initiatives, and new builder recruitment/growth programs, the Endowment will create a “Community Grants” program to fund projects that may fall outside the highest current/ immediate ecosystem priorities, but still widely benefit the community. These projects are conceived and created by members of the Stacks Community to benefit the growth, creation of resources, or general betterment of the Stacks Community (such as media programs, art projects, free/open source tooling, or similar). The Community Grants program will be administered by the operational entity, who will be responsible for creating a public site where community members can submit applications and vote on proposed grants, with final allocations made by direct vote of the Treasury Committee (or a sub-committee they may set up).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Community Grants:** In addition to critical bounties (for needs identified by roadmap priorities), community engagement and marketing initiatives, and new builder recruitment/growth programs, the Endowment will create a “Community Grants” program to fund projects that may fall outside the highest current/immediate ecosystem priorities, but still widely benefit the community. These projects are conceived and created by members of the Stacks Community to benefit the growth, creation of resources, or general betterment of the Stacks Community (such as media programs, art projects, free/open source tooling, or similar). The Community Grants program will be administered by the operational entity, who will be responsible for creating a public site where community members can submit applications and vote on proposed grants, with final allocations made by direct vote of the Treasury Committee (or a sub-committee they may set up).
```

2. The majority (300M STX) of these new emissions will be emitted over the course of 60 months at each PoX tenure start block. These new tokens will be minted and deposited directly to the Treasury address (similar to, but distinct from, coinbase rewards). The specific schedule is based on Bitcoin blocks and chosen to approximate 12 months cycles, assuming a July 30th, 2025 Activation Date & 144 Bitcoin Blocks per day:
   1. **From Block 907,740 (SIP Activation Block & Months 1-11):** 475 STX per tenure start block  
   2. **From Block 960,300 (Months 12-23):** 1,140 STX per tenure start block  
   3. **From Block 1,012,860 (Months 24-35):** 1,705 STX per tenure start block  
   4. **From Block 1,065,420 (Months 36-47):** 1,305 STX per tenure start block  
   5. **From Block 1,117,980 until Block 1,170,540 (Months 48-60):** 1,155 STX per tenure start block

> The Endowment will maintain and publish a primary mint address that all funds will flow to before being deployed. There are potential options to further sustain the treasury that are not in scope of this SIP via protocol revenue paths that can be considered separately, but there are not further treasury mints beyond this endowment. See [Stacks Economic Model](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035) for more details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Endowment will maintain and publish a primary mint address that all funds will flow to before being deployed. There are potential options to further sustain the treasury that are not in scope of this SIP via protocol revenue paths that can be considered separately, but there are no further treasury mints beyond this endowment. See [Stacks Economic Model](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035) for more details.
```

Nomiks was asked to research and provide a recommendation for how the Endowment treasury could be raised via STX and converted to a mix of STX, USD, and BTC in a sustainable manner. In addition to the limitation on the release of tokens, the Endowment will develop a strategy for bringing its tokens to market based upon this analysis and recommendations that will be publicly disclosed and committed to, so ecosystem members have full visibility into the plans. Importantly, to provide a conservative model, Nomiks was asked to analyze data based on existing and historic STX performance, not taking any forward looking roadmap initiatives such as Stacks potential value accrual work streams into account.

This strategy is expected to include the following points:

* Limiting the number of new tokens coming to market to specific limits in line with current market liquidity.  
* Providing a clear public plan and report on the use of funds and tokens brought to market  
* Making use of private sales and lockups for initial capital raise for the Endowment  

> * Conservatively deploying capital in early days to ensure funds remain available

Reviewer 4: Inconsistent punctuation in the bullet points. The first bullet ends with a period, but the other three don't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Limiting the number of new tokens coming to market to specific limits in line with current market liquidity.  
* Providing a clear public plan and report on the use of funds and tokens brought to market.
* Making use of private sales and lockups for initial capital raise for the Endowment.
* Conservatively deploying capital in early days to ensure funds remain available.
```

To ensure that the Stacks Foundation always has sufficient resources to provide its governance role in the ecosystem, the Endowment shall provide up to $500K USD per year (indexed to inflation) in funding for governance activities at the discretion of the Stacks Foundation. This dedicated funding will sustain the core Stacks Improvement Proposal (SIP) processes that ensure community oversight and transparency. It includes resourcing SIP Deputies, Working Groups and/or the CAB, supporting SIP education and SIP editor development, funding SIP engagement bounties and enabling neutral SIP coordination by the Stacks Foundation. The allocation will also support the development and ongoing refinement of bylaws to guide Endowment governance, ensuring strategic decisions reflect the collective will of the community and foster long-term trust and alignment across the Stacks ecosystem. Providing the mechanisms by which community leaders can create, refine, and move proposals forward.

### Technical Implementation
A new Epoch 3.2 will manage the emission of the new tokens and its schedule. To facilitate mints and transfers, Epoch 3.2 relies on a boot contract exposing:

> * A public function update-principal that allows setting the current-principal. The principal set in this smart contract will elect the recipient of the initial 100M STX (minted at epoch transition), the recipient of the unlockings for the second 100M STX over 24 months, and the recipient of the 300M STX transferred over 60 months (at each tenure). 

Reviewer 4: Who will be the authorized caller for `update-principal`? Will `current-principal` have an initial value on deployment?

* A read-only function get-principal returning the current principal (set with update-principal)

> * A read-only function get-original-principal, returning the principal that received the mint of 100M STX (locked and unlocking over 24 months).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A read-only function `get-principal` returning the current principal (set with `update-principal`).
```

> * A read-only function get-original-principal, returning the principal that received the mint of 100M STX (locked and unlocking over 24 months).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A read-only function `get-original-principal`, returning the principal that received the mint of 100M STX (locked and unlocking over 24 months).
```

* A public function, unlock-at-bitcoin-height, that given a bitcoin height returns non-zero if any amount unlocks (over the 24 months phase). 

```clarity
(define-public (update-principal (new-principal principal) (response bool uint))

> (define-read-only (get-principal) (response principal uint))

Reviewer 4: If `current-principal` is stored as an `optional` data-var, then `get-principal` could return `(optional principal)` instead of `(response principal uint)`. Using `none`/`some` would looks more semantically appropriate to me than success/error responses, unless there's a specific error condition you need to handle beyond the `principal` simply not being set yet.

Reviewer 6: The main reason is to have more versatility in the implementation: there could be specific cases for which we want to return a specific error. Eventually we could keep both (response returning an optional principal)

> (define-read-only (get-original-principal) (response principal uint))

Reviewer: this should be resolved in [e4cc7d7](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/commits/e4cc7d790a7e0fbc3b51ad800fcf45ae1c844666)

(define-public (unlock-at-bitcoin-height (bitcoin-height uint) (response (tuple (original principal) (recipient principal)) uint)))
```

> This design allows the principal that will receive funds during the 5 years cycle to change (e.g., in case of a rotation in the treasury committee), while keeping the smart contract extremely simple to reduce potential attack surface and implementation complexity.

Reviewer 7: assuming a third party audit of this new contract is still planned before release. should this be part of activation criteria?

> * When instantiated on mainnet, current-principal will be a 3 out of 5 multisig, deterministically generated starting from the public keys of the 5 treasury signers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When instantiated on mainnet, `current-principal` will be a 3 out of 5 multisig, deterministically generated starting from the public keys of the 5 treasury signers. 
```

> * To rotate the signing set, current-principal will issue a call to update-principal.

Reviewer 7: what is the fall-back when treasury signers are non responsive/MIA or have lost or compromised keys or collude to never roll over to new signers?

> * To rotate the signing set, current-principal will issue a call to update-principal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To rotate the signing set, `current-principal` will issue a call to `update-principal`.
```

* All mint events of epoch 3.2 will produce a receipt that will be attached to the coinbase of the block in which the mint happened.

#### 100M STX at epoch transition
At epoch transition (activation), 100M STX will be minted and transferred to the recipient resulting from the get-principal call of contract above. The mint will produce a corresponding receipt (attached to the coinbase transaction as described above).

#### 100M STX unlocking in 24 iterations

> At epoch transition (activation), 100M STX will be minted and transferred to the recipient resulting from the get-principal call of contract, where they will remain locked. 

Reviewer 8: Should this be transferred to the contract, not to the principal specified in the contract? If I'm understanding the intentions here, then the STX should be locked in the contract until distributed following the details below, every ~month.

1. If they match, an unlock of 1/24th of the funds will be applied;
2. if they differ, a transfer to the recipient will be accomplished too (this will allow to change the recipients of the unlocking process at any time).

In addition to minting, locking will generate a receipt for the coinbase transaction as well as the (eventual) unlock-and-transfer.

At each tenure start, the amount of STX detailed detailed in the [Endowment Creation & Specifications](#endowment-creation--specifications) section will be minted and transferred to the recipient resulting from the `get-principal` call of contract (1) above. Each transfer will produce a corresponding receipt.

### Implementation parameters

| Parameter | Detail |
| ---- | ---- |
| Activation height | XXX |
| Contract address | XXX |
| Contract initial principal | XXX |

## Potential Risks
This SIP proposes a bold course forward in growing the Stacks ecosystem, which does not come without potential risks and considerations.

**1\. Fundraising Execution Risk**  

> The Endowment’s ambitious five-year fundraising target of $405M, primarily through structured token sales, is subject to significant market timing risk. Prolonged bear markets could constrain fundraising opportunities, while the 7% annual inflation cap limits flexibility in adjusting to adverse conditions. Achieving funding goals will require carefully aligning operational cash flow needs with favorable market conditions—an inherently uncertain task. To manage this, the Endowment intends to maintain a dynamic approach to fundraising, adjusting cadence and scale based on prevailing market signals and community consensus (see Nomiks report for more detail).

Reviewer 4: Good point! This suggestion would simplify the reader journey assuming it did not follow the previous links yet, but it's not a blocker. We don't need to take action on it.

**Ecosystem Reputational Risk:** There is much debate in the crypto industry over the appropriateness of changing the rates of emissions, particularly among the Bitcoin community. While Stacks is intended as a gas token for operating the network, there is the possibility that the ecosystem will receive criticism or attack for creating a treasury via emissions after the mainnet launch.

**Appearance of Centralization:** Creating a single Endowment may also be interpreted as being overly centralized. To mitigate this, the structure proposed in this SIP is designed to maintain decentralized governance around the key aspects of control and require clear, accountable reporting to the community.

**Stacks Unique Position:** While many other ecosystems have changed emissions schedules or created treasuries to fund growth, there is no exact 1:1 corollary we can look to of an ecosystem with Stacks’ unique history and position in the market to predict how this will ultimately be viewed. This is an inherent risk of making a bold attempt at something.

## Summary of benefits

A summary of the expected benefits of SIP-31 can be seen here: [Summary of Benefits](./summary_of_benefits.md)

> 

Reviewer 2: Per SIP-000, the following sections are missing and, AFAICT, have to be added before the Activation section: 
1. Related Work - Must summarize alternative solutions and explain why they're inadequate.
2. Backwards Compatibility - Must address hard fork compatibility concerns and technical mitigations.

# Preamble

SIP Number: 031

Title: SIP-031: Five-Year Stacks Growth Emissions

Author(s):
- Mitchell Cuevas (Stacks Foundation)
- Alex Miller (Hiro)
- Tycho Onnasch (Zest)
- Jakob Schillinger (Hermetica)
- Andre Serrano (Bitcoin L2 Labs)
- Dylan Floyd (Bitflow)

> Type: Economic, Governance

Reviewer 9: The emission of new STX tokens is also a technical change. We need a hard fork and a new epoch. Or will that follow in a new Technical SIP with another vote? Then this should be added in the Post Vote section

Reviewer 5: yes, good point, will require a hard fork
```suggestion
Type: Economic, Governance, Technical
```

Together, these changes will give the Stacks ecosystem the capital, execution speed, and organizational clarity required to compete with top ecosystems — ensuring that Stacks can continue to lead and aggressively grow market share as the leading Bitcoin L2; unlocking long-term value for builders, users, and holders.

## Stacks Roadmap Summary

This treasury will fuel development along the [Stacks roadmap](http://stacksroadmap.com), which has been refreshed via a series of [community workshops](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984) ([1](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984)), the latest version of which has been published in support of this SIP. The treasury will be created to deliver on these and other priorities as defined by builders and key stakeholders and provide the necessary resources for Stacks’ progression in the following critical areas, among others:

**1\. Stacks Core Development:**

> This covers upgrades to increase transaction speed, reliability, scalability, and security — including improved block production, miner replay logic, Clarity-to-Wasm compilation, ongoing enhancements to PoX and stacking UX, security bounties, audits, and monitoring.

Reviewer 2: good point!

**Benefits of this SIP by stakeholder type**

| Stakeholder | Benefits |
| ----- | ----- |
| Builders & Developers | *Access to capital and liquidity at all stages of their journey to fuel growth and a faster moving technical foundation as Stacks core and sBTC development velocity is increased.* |
| Holders/Investors | *Improved market dynamics and token value potential through clearer communication and increased transparency about strategic treasury deployment and dedicated financial stewardship.* |
| Users | *Access to high-quality apps and DeFi opportunities powered by ecosystem-wide growth incentives and broader Stacks brand awareness.* |
| Contributing Entities | *Freedom to operate and scale without legacy constraints or fragmented operational overhead.* |
| Ecosystem Partners | *Streamlined integrations, additional capital, and clear ownership unlock faster go-to-market and deeper collaboration with the Stacks ecosystem.* |
| Casual Holders | *A stronger, more visible, and more valuable ecosystem with clearer communication, governance, and confidence in the long-term plan and resources required to execute it* |

> 

Reviewer 2: In the 'Benefits by stakeholder type' table, I notice security isn't explicitly highlighted as a benefit for any stakeholder group. From a technical perspective, security infrastructure could benefit both builders (reducing costs) and users (increased trust). I think it would strengthen the proposal to include this as an explicit benefit (right now I think it's only implied).

Reviewer 5: As noted in another comment, security is absolutely a major focus but is already mentioned repeatedly throughout the SIP. It also doesn't really make sense to put as a benefit for any one particular group since its a benefit for all

* [Stacks Economic Model: Unlocking BTC Capital & Long Term Growth](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035)  
* [sBTC Design Principles](https://bitcoinl2labs.com/sbtc-design-principles)  
* [Stacks DeFi Growth Roadmap](https://forum.stacks.org/t/2025-roadmap-defi-road-to-1bn-defi-tvl/18032)

If approved, this SIP calls for the treasury funds to be allocated in accordance with the roadmap and other resources linked directly above. Taking a look at the top-line budget, it will be deployed across several key areas with the following approximate breakdown:

#### Stacks Endowment Initial Budget Allocation

* **Operations and Staff: 10%** This category includes the costs to run a lean organization of employees, contractors, and other roles, as the execution responsibility folds into a new primary execution entity, as described in the next section. Operations and Staff also includes costs for custody, compliance and legal fees, recurring platform subscriptions, financial reporting, and general operating expenses. Back office consolidation is generally considered beneficial because efficiencies are realized.  

> * **Engineering and Security: 12%** The commitment to the core blockchain, sBTC, and the security model for Stacks needs ongoing funding. These funds will enable increased engineering velocity and create additional bandwidth for development work streams to happen in parallel. These funds will also be used to double down on efforts like whitehat security engagements, onboarding of leading experts like [Asymmetric Research](https://stacks.org/asymmetric-joins-stacks-ecosystem), ongoing bounty programs, audits, and much more. Importantly, these funds can also be deployed to support builders as they seek to build and remain secure \- expenses that were previously tricky for others to pay for under the current model. As the ecosystem grows, so too should its investment in engineering and security.  

Reviewer 5: These are grouped because they are inherently linked with each other - a primary focus for core devs is security

* **Brand campaigns and KOL engagement:** *Strategic marketing initiatives will raise awareness of Stacks and sBTC and drive user adoption by highlighting key value propositions and use cases.
* **Exchange listings (SIP-010 standard), capital markets activities, and ecosystem TGE liquidity:** The Endowment will support STX and sBTC liquidity on exchanges and help facilitate successful token generation events (TGEs) for new projects launching within the Stacks ecosystem by pursing SIP-010 standard integrations on major exchanges, thereby removing friction for teams, and facilitating the necessary introductions. 
* **Marketing, education, and user acquisition:** Educational programs and user acquisition campaigns will help new users understand and engage with the Stacks ecosystem, driving growth and adoption.
* **Business development, partnerships, and M\&A:** The Endowment will actively pursue strategic partnerships and business development opportunities to expand the reach and influence of the Stacks ecosystem. Examples may include stablecoins, bridges, onramps, and other critical partnerships.* 

> * **Other initiatives as identified by the community and Treasury Committee:** A portion of the Endowment will remain flexible to address emerging needs and support innovative ideas that are identified by the community.

Reviewer: my understanding from reading (correct me if incorrect) is that these costs would fall under "engineering".

> * **Other initiatives as identified by the community and Treasury Committee:** A portion of the Endowment will remain flexible to address emerging needs and support innovative ideas that are identified by the community.

Reviewer 3: Based on what I read, I think "**security tooling, audits (subsidized, in-house), and security education.**" @moodmosaic mentioned are basically built into the "Engineering and Security: 12%" budget. Just not explicitly stating out each item, neither do I think it needs to state every single actual item. Feels totally fine?

> * **Other initiatives as identified by the community and Treasury Committee:** A portion of the Endowment will remain flexible to address emerging needs and support innovative ideas that are identified by the community.

Reviewer: related to https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/files#r2160102445

- Alex Miller (Hiro)
- Tycho Onnasch (Zest)
- Jakob Schillinger (Hermetica)
- Andre Serrano (Bitcoin L2 Labs)
- Dylan Floyd (Bitflow)

Type: Economic, Governance

Status: Draft

Created: 6/12/2025

License: CC0-1.0

Sign-off: Pending

Discussions:
- [[DRAFT] Fueling Stacks Builders & Growth, Meet SIP-031](https://forum.stacks.org/t/draft-fueling-stacks-builders-growth-meet-sip-031/18060/)
- [SIP 31.1 - A New Draft Arrives](https://forum.stacks.org/t/sip-31-1-a-new-draft-arrives/18130 )
- [Workshops: SIP-031 Appointments Committee](https://forum.stacks.org/t/workshops-sip-031-appointments-committee/18141/8 )
  

# Abstract

* Stacks’ goal as an ecosystem is to empower the creation of the Bitcoin economy \- we envision that all projects that want to build on Bitcoin, from DeFi to gaming, memecoins to NFTs, and marketplaces to identity, should be built on top of Stacks.  
* Stacks is transitioning from a tech-first to a traction-first phase, fueled by a new endowment and streamlined operations.  
* The proposal raises fresh capital to put Stacks on par with other top projects, addressing historic underfunding and unlocking the ability to compete at scale.  

> * A new operational entity will scale execution, while a community-governed endowment ensures transparent, accountable, and sustainable growth.  

Reviewer: Clarification: what is meant here by `scale execution`? And if this org is the first operation approved by the endowment, would it make more sense to define later in the document vs in the abstract?

* This is Stacks’ decisive step to accelerate adoption, empower builders of all sizes, and drive long-term value for all stakeholders.  
* Upcoming protocol upgrades will further reinforce sustainability by enabling a portion of future protocol revenue to support the Stacks Endowment, ensuring ongoing value accrual for the ecosystem.

This SIP proposes a “best of both worlds” approach to the next phase of growth for Stacks \- maintaining our decentralized governance while creating a new streamlined operational structure and Endowment to fuel driving Stacks to being a Top 10 ecosystem as the home of the Bitcoin economy.

> Specifically, it will create a dedicated Stacks Endowment to manage a consolidated STX treasury focused on ecosystem growth. The treasury will be created through ongoing token emissions over the next five years and seed STX transfers from key contributors. The new proposed structure will allow for more efficient execution among contributors by organizing efforts around a new operational entity that will provide both the capital and structure needed to make strategic investments in user and builder focused incentives, additional development capacity, security, marketing, liquidity, and business development initiatives needed to fuel the Stacks ecosystem during this next phase of growth.

Reviewer 5: this is the only mention of it in the abstract, but its included in detail in the section documenting creation of the endowment.

it feels important to me to leave in there since its about giving people the complete picture of where the funds are coming from

In sum, this SIP proposes a framework for continued success as the leading Bitcoin L2, using the “hook” of Bitcoin DeFi to pull in users and liquidity while sustainably increasing the resources and efficiency with which to enable all contributors, builders, and holders as the Stacks ecosystem continues to activate the Bitcoin economy to onboard the next billion users to bitcoin across all use cases.

# Introduction

The Stacks ecosystem is entering a new phase of growth, made possible by critical network upgrades in 2024, including [Nakamoto](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-021/sip-021-nakamoto.md) and [sBTC](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-028/sip-028-sbtc_peg.md). With sBTC, the network enables Bitcoin to be used in everyday economic activity beyond just holding, with further integrations, partnerships, and growth efforts supporting multiple emerging Bitcoin use cases. To meet this opportunity, this SIP proposes the creation of a new growth-focused treasury and a streamlined structure for increased operational efficiency in the ecosystem.

> # License and Copyright

Reviewer 10: This should go above the `# Introduction`

This SIP is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons CC0 1.0
Universal license, available at
https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ This SIP’s copyright is held
by the Stacks Open Internet Foundation.

## Problem Statement

Over the last several years, the Stacks ecosystem has encountered multiple structural and financial constraints that have, at times, limited its ability to scale efficiently:

> * **Underfunded relative to competitors:** Stacks raised \~$80M over six years ago — less than most top 50 projects, despite increased demands from sBTC launch, bitcoin DeFi applications, and new protocol upgrades like Stacks Nakamoto launch.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Underfunded relative to competitors:** Stacks raised \~$80M over six years ago — less than most top 50 projects, despite increased demands from sBTC launch, Bitcoin DeFi applications, and new protocol upgrades like Stacks Nakamoto launch.  
```

* **Enable greater capital efficiency at scale:** The new treasury will enable meaningful STX liquidity programs, user incentives, and core development funding at a scale previously unavailable to Stacks while increasing accountability to community members.  
* **Commitment to transparent governance:** The community's governance over the open source ecosystem is unchanged, retaining control over all aspects of Stacks technical and ecosystem development via SIPs. The Endowment entity, free of restrictions placed on the current foundation and others, will also be able to provide a more granular level of financial reporting. The community is the key stakeholder and guide for the Endowment.

Together, these changes will give the Stacks ecosystem the capital, execution speed, and organizational clarity required to compete with top ecosystems — ensuring that Stacks can continue to lead and aggressively grow market share as the leading Bitcoin L2; unlocking long-term value for builders, users, and holders.

## Stacks Roadmap Summary

> This treasury will fuel development along the [Stacks roadmap](http://stacksroadmap.com), which has been refreshed via a series of [community workshops](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984) ([1](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984)), the latest version of which has been published in support of this SIP. The treasury will be created to deliver on these and other priorities as defined by builders and key stakeholders and provide the necessary resources for Stacks’ progression in the following critical areas, among others:

Reviewer: I'd prefer to see links like this annotated, so a reader can clearly see what the full url is. example: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-015/sip-015-network-upgrade.md#references

```
This treasury will fuel development along the Stacks roadmap [1], which has been refreshed via a series of community workshops [2], the latest ...
...
# References

[1] http://stacksroadmap.com
[2] https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984

Reviewer 5: Isn't the annotation model less easy for readers to see what the link is? With the embeded links you can just hover (or see naturally if viewing the markdown source) but with references you need to click/scroll down to the references section

Reviewer 5: I just flipped through and it seems like standard practice on previous SIPs has been to leave links to other websites as inline but links to reference papers that are included in the repo as references

Make sense to just follow that convention and update as such?

Reviewer: it's definitely debatable! it's more of a style suggestion for readability in a design document vs a blocking change for the PR. i'll leave open for now, a change here won't affect any vote or technical/goverance/economics analysis - if this is the final form of the PR, we can resolve this (and a few other similar comments) before a merge happens.

> 

Reviewer: This is a meta comment, but it seems like the following numbered list is just copypasta from the linked resources above. i would argue that unless including them here adds anything new, it should be removed and the reader may read the provided resources to get the same information.

Reviewer 5: If the goal is to have this document give the full picture of what people are being asked to vote on, including the context (especially of something so material), makes sense to include as actual text

**3\. Ecosystem Growth:**

Strategic efforts to scale TVL, liquidity, and user adoption through community based marketing and growth strategies, grant programs, DeFi incentives, sBTC TVL milestones, stablecoin integrations, and centralized exchange listings for SIP-10 tokens.

This roadmap reflects the core areas where capital from the Stacks endowment will be deployed if SIP-031 is approved — focusing on core protocol upgrades, institutional support, developer traction, and Stacks value accrual.

## Key artifacts related to this SIP

In preparing this SIP, the authors have gathered essential information to help Stacks holders provide informed feedback and make confident voting decisions. Inside, you’ll find summaries and links to:

> * A complete economic impact study, performed by a neutral 3rd party token economics research firm. (LINK)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A complete economic impact study, performed by a neutral 3rd party token economics research firm. ( [Nomiks_Analysis_5Y_Plan_Final.pdf](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/cuevasm-patch-1/sips/sip-031/Nomiks_Analysis_5Y_Plan_Final.pdf) )  
```

Reviewer: Prefer this to be annotated, but the report is in the PR now

* The latest iteration of the Stacks Roadmap, containing the sum total of feedback and input from the community over the past 3-months for core development on Stacks supporting a range of use cases ([stacksroadmap.com](https://stacksroadmap.com/))  
* Key future plans around potential value accrual proposals that will support and enhance the changes proposed by this SIP, and a path for long-term treasury sustainability. ([Stacks Forum](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035))  
* A Stacks DeFi growth plan, with a focus on short-term outcomes that can be driven by the new treasury. ([Stacks](https://forum.stacks.org/t/2025-roadmap-defi-road-to-1bn-defi-tvl/18032) [Forum](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035))  

> * The next generation of sBTC, including technical design research ([Bitcoin L2 Labs](https://bitcoinl2labs.com/sbtc-design-principles))

Reviewer: Annotate links please

These artifacts communicate where Stacks is headed and what it can achieve. They also provide clear context as to why this proposal is well-timed and will usher in an exciting new era of traction for Stacks.

## Expected Benefits Of Approval

**The solutions outlined in this proposal are designed to directly address the most pressing needs identified by those at the core of the Stacks ecosystem by:**

* Introducing operational efficiency in key functional areas through a new operational entity that serves as a major contributor for protocol development, community engagement & growth, global marketing, and capital markets.  
* Unlocking capital essential for ecosystem and application growth.  

> * Establishing dedicated resources and clear ownership in critical areas where the Stacks ecosystem has previously been unable, or only partially able, to participate (details on these areas follow below).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Establishing dedicated resources and clear ownership in critical areas where the Stacks ecosystem has previously been unable, or only partially able, to participate.  
```

A reader will organically see these details, i don't think it needs to be said that *it will be said*

* Enabling long-term ecosystem funding through smart treasury management and any future protocol revenue, aligning capitalization with the project’s caliber and the needs of its builders.

Importantly, these changes are structured to preserve community oversight and governance, ensuring all processes and decisions remain transparent.

> Throughout this SIP, the authors have provided a detailed exploration of how this proposal stands to benefit all Stacks stakeholders. Later sections will break down these advantages by stakeholder type, while this introduction provides a high-level summary of the key benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I'm not sure this paragraph adds anything of value, the next section clearly outlines the benefits.

Reviewer: Perhaps - but does it add more context that the following section(s) do not?

**Benefits of this SIP by stakeholder type**

| Stakeholder | Benefits |
| ----- | ----- |

> | Builders & Developers | *Access to capital and liquidity at all stages of their journey to fuel growth and a faster moving technical foundation as Stacks core and sBTC development velocity is increased.* |

Reviewer 5: I think readers understand that inherently

> | Builders & Developers | *Access to capital and liquidity at all stages of their journey to fuel growth and a faster moving technical foundation as Stacks core and sBTC development velocity is increased.* |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Builders & Developers | *Access to capital and liquidity at all stages of their journey to fuel growth and a faster moving technical foundation.* |
```

> | Holders/Investors | *Improved market dynamics and token value potential through clearer communication and increased transparency about strategic treasury deployment and dedicated financial stewardship.* |

Reviewer 5: This isn't really something that can be analyzed in a report, but it is based on conversations with a number of investors and capital markets professionals

> | Users | *Faster access to high-quality apps and DeFi opportunities powered by ecosystem-wide growth incentives and broader Stacks brand awareness.* |

Reviewer: This line is really confusing to me - how will `ecosystem-wide growth incentives and broader Stacks branch awareness` provide **faster** access to so-called `high-quality apps`?
I'll have to think more on wording, but i think it could be rewritten to focus on higher quality apps that are regularly maintained due to the additional incentives provided by this SIP.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Users | *Access to high-quality apps and DeFi opportunities powered by ecosystem-wide growth incentives and broader Stacks brand awareness.* |
```

> | Contributing Entities | *Freedom to operate and scale without legacy constraints or fragmented operational overhead.* |

Reviewer: i would remove `legacy constraints` here, else i would advise to list out what these contsraints currently are, and how this SIP resolves them. i think the line still works without that text though, so i would just remove it.

| Ecosystem Partners | *Streamlined integrations, additional capital, and clear ownership unlock faster go-to-market and deeper collaboration with the Stacks ecosystem.* |
| Casual Holders | *A stronger, more visible, and more valuable ecosystem with clearer communication, governance, and confidence in the long-term plan and resources required to execute it* |

Treasury deployment will be focused on accelerating sBTC adoption and driving Bitcoin capital onto the Stacks network in ways that directly reinforce the STX flywheel. For example:

1. Enabling dual-stacking can attract large BTC inflows while increasing demand for STX to unlock higher rewards.  
2. Increasing usage of apps where users pay gas in sBTC drives up protocol transactions — each of which ultimately requires STX at the protocol layer.  
3. Similarly, enabling DeFi vaults with native liquidity pools ensures deeper markets for Stacks DeFi, which increases sBTC utility, boosts protocol revenue, and creates sustainable STX buy pressure while bringing new users and capital into the Stacks ecosystem to engage with the entire universe of Bitcoin apps built here.

> In each case, targeted capital deployment turns ecosystem growth into protocol-level demand for STX.

Reviewer 5: This isn't really covered in the Nomiks report but is more just noting the strategy as described in the roadmaps and other materials

4. **Strengthening accountability.** Mechanisms for community oversight of new entities are either maintained or improved, reflecting direct feedback from the community.  
5. **Balancing short- and long-term needs.** The SIP should address immediate priorities and sustainable, long-term capital required to grow the project for many decades.

## Maintaining Strong Decentralization

The commitment to decentralization remains. Let’s quickly reflect on the questions originally asked when forming the current ecosystem: [https://blog.blockstack.org/the-stacks-ecosystem-next-steps-on-the-path-to-decentralization](https://blog.blockstack.org/the-stacks-ecosystem-next-steps-on-the-path-to-decentralization).

* **Technology**: To what extent is the technology itself centralized? Are there parts of the technology that are owned or controlled by particular individuals or entities?  
* **Governance:** To what extent can an individual or single entity dictate changes to the technology and decide its future?  
* **Ecosystem:** To what extent do single individuals or entities hold such influence that there is little room for contribution from others?

> The authors of this SIP are committed to maintaining decentralization in alignment with these established values. This proposal identifies opportunities to streamline key ecosystem operations while preserving essential checks and balances, ensuring the continued benefits of decentralization.

Reviewer: It shouldn't be the author's intent to maintain decentralization - the SIP itself should maintain that.

Reviewer 5: Revised the language in this section in this commit https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/commits/d38c6f1f92c8b7c3ef3ad1a2c22141f9a52a5f87

> The authors of this SIP are committed to maintaining decentralization in alignment with these established values. This proposal identifies opportunities to streamline key ecosystem operations while preserving essential checks and balances, ensuring the continued benefits of decentralization.

Reviewer: i don't think this list or the preceding sentence add any value here - the last paragraph is what's important, if this SIP is concerned with appearing to centrailze.

Some of the measures in place to ensure the ecosystem remains decentralized include:

* The technical operation of the blockchain is still fully decentralized based on the participation of miners and signers.  
* No one party has unique ownership or control to make changes to the blockchain and the code remains open-source and owned by the community.  
* The blockchain will still be governed by the same process administered by the Stacks Foundation and dependent on what miners and signers choose to do.  

> * To further ensure the open governance process, the Stacks Endowment will not vote its tokens during SIP votes.  

Reviewer: i like this point!
i would also suggest a line is added that the endowment tokens may not also participate in stacking. 

secondly, this SIP should be updated later with the address(es) of the endowment so that it can be confirmed these things are not happening.

Reviewer 3: I'd like to continue to propose except as per Fleetz's caveat suggestion text "**community allocation is the exception**". If blanket forbidden participations text is too limiting for future potentiality. 
Though I'm on the same page, as much not Stacking the better. 
Discussion here: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214#discussion_r2158915120

Reviewer 5: added a line about not Stacking it's tokens

the SIP already mandates/commits that the Endowment's addresses need to be published publicly so that members of the community can see them and trace all the flows

Reviewer 3: What I'd like to know is, if a community funding proposal comes through to TC, like a Degrants but totally doesn't have to be, I hope more funding projects takes Stacking approach. For X amount to be Stacked, and using yield as its payment. Let's say for the sake of example that's vetting, good plan, good KPI. 

How can you logistically make it happen? Can it logistically happen.

Reviewer 5: @Hero-Gamer I'm not sure I understand your question there?

Reviewer 5: Revised the language in this section in this commit https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/commits/d38c6f1f92c8b7c3ef3ad1a2c22141f9a52a5f87

Reviewer 3: I confirm. Discussed with various members of community and decided best to leave 0% for default. 

Happy with the wording added `The Endowment will not participate in Stacking with it's tokens without first receiving general approval of the community to do so.`
to give future room to Stacking for whatever reason case by case basis with community approval.

> * To further ensure the open governance process, the Stacks Endowment will not vote its tokens during SIP votes.  

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* To further ensure the open governance process, the Stacks Endowment will not vote its tokens during SIP votes and will not Stack it's tokens.  
```

# Specification

## The Stacks Endowment

This SIP calls for the creation of a new consolidated ecosystem Endowment which will be funded through a combination of STX transfers from existing entities and people, a one-time mint of 100m STX to provide initial working capital (that is, STX deployed by the Endowment but not released onto the open market), and build a longer term treasury through new emissions over the next 5 years that temporarily bring Stacks’ annual emissions from 3.52% to an average of 5.75% per year. This target was chosen by first estimating the total resources necessary to achieve the stated objectives in this SIP over the first 5 years of the Endowment (both STX and USD denominated amounts) based on comparisons to other Top 50 crypto ecosystems. Next, an economic report from a third party research firm (details and a link to the report are below) was commissioned to identify the likely value of the STX based on several different scenarios. Finally, the approximate number of STX needed, based on the likely value of the tokens to be converted, to meet the resourcing needs estimated.

> The Endowment plan also includes a model that mitigates the short-term impact on STX holders (including by not having the early minted tokens be released onto the market) and, via a deep economic study, accounts for the primary risks typically associated with increased inflation. The mechanics of treasury creation are covered in more detail below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Endowment plan also includes a model that mitigates the short-term impact on STX holders by not having the early minted tokens be released onto the market and, via a deep economic study, accounts for the primary risks typically associated with increased inflation. The mechanics of treasury creation are covered in more detail below.
```
the mitigations here seem like they're just a list, parentheses feel out of place for what's being described.

### Why a new treasury?

This capital allows Stacks to move more quickly on its mission to activate the Bitcoin economy. As crypto matures and the landscape of Bitcoin layers that Stacks founded grows, velocity is critical. The additional capital will align the ecosystem with both competitive and partner ecosystems in the space, ensuring Stacks is not left behind due to a treasury created in an entirely different landscape, which has already been leveraged extensively in growing the ecosystem over the past 6 years. It will enable the type of growth-focused activities builders need as they leverage the new speeds and security of Nakamoto and the sBTC asset launched in late 2024\. While the technology will continue to progress, the ecosystem’s top priority in 2025 is driving traction, requiring an investment in growth activities and economic flywheels, which the new structure and capital will allow for.

> *Other ecosystems that updated their treasury operations and allocated material growth funding have successfully unlocked new products, achieved roadmap milestones, improved liquidity, and enabled real-time, transparent funding for builders-outcomes that are now considered essential for ecosystem leadership.*

Reviewer: this section actually answers a qustion i had reading the paragraph above, thanks!
BUT - can you provide sources for what you're claiming?

ideally though, i think this list belongs in the `Related Work` section: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-000/sip-000-stacks-improvement-proposal-process.md?plain=1#L171-L177

Reviewer 5: I believe there are links for all the sources further down

- **Increased development activity:** Consistent funding for core protocol developers to drive development and innovation.  
- **Ecosystem growth:** Grants and incentives will attract developers, projects, and users to the Stacks ecosystem.  
- **Enhanced marketing and adoption:** Dedicated resources towards marketing will increase awareness and adoption of Stacks.  
- **Improved market dynamics:** Active treasury management and more robust capital markets activities can contribute to a healthier STX market.

#### Treasury Allocations & Usage

**Building for the Long Run: Roadmap and Stacks Value Accrual**

To more deeply understand the technical and growth efforts this SIP intends to support, we invite voters and stakeholders to read the following key resources:

* [Stacks Roadmap Update](https://stacksroadmap.com)  
* [Stacks Economic Model: Unlocking BTC Capital & Long Term Growth](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035)  
* [sBTC Design Principles](https://bitcoinl2labs.com/sbtc-design-principles)  
* [Stacks DeFi Growth Roadmap](https://forum.stacks.org/t/2025-roadmap-defi-road-to-1bn-defi-tvl/18032)

> If approved, this SIP calls for the treasury funds to be allocated in accordance with the roadmap and other resources linked directly above. Taking a look at the top-line budget, it will be deployed across several key areas with the following approximate breakdown:

Reviewer: i'm assuming `roadmap` here refers to the stacksroadmap site. if true, please annotate the link so it's more clear.

> #### Stacks Endowment Initial Budget Allocation

Reviewer 5: Having discussed with folks, the initial allocation here is simply what the breakdown is expected to be, but will likely evolve over time - we could modify the line in 210 to end as "it will be deployed across several key areas, with the first year's expected breakdown being approximately:"

2. 100M STX will be created via a one-time token mint, immediately upon implementation of the SIP \- while immediately unlocked and usable, these tokens will be used for working capital and will not be released to the open market.

The rest of the Endowment will be created via new emissions over a 60-month period.

Of these new emissions,

1. The first 100M STX will be minted as locked and will unlock over the first 24 months with 1/24th unlocking each month \- these tokens will also not come to the open market but rather will be sold while locked via OTC/private placements with 12-36 month lockups in order to raise the initial USD operational capital for the Endowment.  
2. The majority (300M STX) of these new emissions will be emitted over the course of 60 months at each PoX tenure anchor block. These new tokens will be minted and deposited directly to the Treasury address (similar to, but distinct from, coinbase rewards). The specific schedule is:  
   1. **Months 1-11:** 475 STX per anchor block  

>    2. **Months 12-23:** 1,140 STX per anchor block  

Reviewer 5: @friedger the idea was to pick BTC blocks that roughly align to the monthly schedule as part of implementation. It's not following a straight halving cycle as the goal was to maintain consistent inflation over time which requires changing the amount of the emissions for this against other emissions and unlocks.

>    2. **Months 12-23:** 1,140 STX per anchor block  

Reviewer: I think it'd be better to define the timeframe in blocks then, and then estimated human readable times (like months 1-11). this would give a more clear picture, and if something does or doesn't happen - it's not dependent on a "month" if the specified block hasn't been mined yet.

>    2. **Months 12-23:** 1,140 STX per anchor block  

Reviewer 5: added a commit to update this

* Making use of private sales and lockups for initial capital raise for the Endowment  
* Conservatively deploying capital in early days to ensure funds remain available

##### Inflation Impact

Nomiks’ proposed emissions and conversion programs were designed with the goal of keeping Stacks’ annual inflation (including the existing coinbase reward for miners) below that of most other Top 50 projects, which have a median inflation rate of **10.18%**, as seen on [this sheet](./blockchain_projects_50_2024_inflation_rate.pdf).

Given that current PoX inflation rates are 3.52%, the goal is to have Stacks remain below **7%** average annual inflation from all sources (both mining and new emissions combined) over the next 5 years, which is well below the **10%** of other ecosystems from above.

Not including the initial mint, the total inflation rate for each of the 5 years of emissions and unlocks is as follows:

| Year | Total STX Emissions (incl Treasury & PoX) |
| --- | --- |
| Year 1 | 7% |
| Year 2 | 7% |
| Year 3 | 7% |
| Year 4 | 4.25% |
| Year 5 | 3.50% |
| Average Yearly Emissions | 5.75% |

Once the minting is complete, annual inflation for STX will be \<2%.

> The full report from Nomiks can be seen **[here](https://forum.stacks.org/uploads/short-url/pgKEv8ljXuWpCC1GnkyIi3pD8SV.pdf)**

Reviewer: this can be removed and annotated above, the report is part of the PR now

Reviewer 5: This was included intentionally in the text itself to provide the key item summary for readers who don't want to go through the entire report

Reviewer 5: sorry, I misunderstood what you where referring to as removing (I thought the table showing inflation rates, but you mean the link).

I agree should link to the PDF included in the repo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The full report from Nomiks can be seen [here](./Nomiks_Analysis_5Y_Plan_Final.pdf)
```

**Future Token Burns**: The rate of emissions in this SIP were chosen based on the third party economic analysis and to ensure that the Endowment raised sufficient funds  even in a scenario where the token price does not considerably rise. Therefore, it is possible that if STX materially overperforms the model in the economic report in the short to mid-term (for instance if it rose to $10+ /token), then the Endowment will likely be sufficiently equipped without needing all of the planned emissions and a token burn can be set up to burn the later part of the emissions. This will also depend on the performance of some of the value accrual mechanisms (like sBTC gas fees) that would provide more funds that could be used for burns.

> As such, if the size of the Endowment’s total liquid assets grows to exceed $1b USD, it will devise a burn program and present that program to the community for a vote, along with other options for the community to select from, including continuing to grow the Endowment or allocation of the future tokens to other purposes.

Reviewer: How will the community vote on this? can you specify the method that will be used?
I'm assuming it will be a SIP if this is the case, but i think it should be specified for clarity.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As such, if the size of the Endowment’s total liquid assets grows to exceed $1b USD, it will devise a burn program and present that program to the community for a SIP vote, along with other options for the community to select from, including continuing to grow the Endowment or allocation of the future tokens to other purposes.
```

The Treasury itself will be held by a Cayman Non-Profit Foundation. This structure was selected for its robust, well-established legal framework for crypto projects under Cayman law, offering long-term predictability and confidence in the Endowment’s operations.

**Endowment Operations & Staff**: Similar to other non-profits, the day-to-day management of the Endowment and its staff will be overseen by a Chief Investment Officer (CIO) who reports to the Treasury Committee and is selected following a public recruitment process.

**Treasury Committee**: The Treasury Committee will be empowered by the Endowment to supervise the Endowment’s assets and major actions. This includes appointing the Chief Investment Officer, reviewing the endowment’s investment policy and asset allocation, overseeing investment performance, establishing budgets, and approving significant partnerships and agreements.

> **Treasury Committee Membership**: The voting membership of the Treasury Committee will consist of nine members \- 8 appointed from the Stacks community per the process below, plus the Endowment’s Chief Investment Officer. All community appointed members serve 4 year terms, with four members appointed each 24 months to ensure continuity. Members may be re-appointed to successive terms.

Reviewer 3: I see some potential ambiguous here. 

`8 appointed from the Stacks community per the process below, plus the Endowment’s Chief Investment Officer. All community appointed members **serve 4 year terms**, with four members appointed each 24 months to ensure continuity. Members may be re-appointed to successive terms. `

`Keyholders are chosen by a 2/3rds vote of the Treasury Committee and **serve indefinite terms** until they resign or are removed by a 2/3rds majority vote of the Treasury Committee. Keyholders may be, but are not required to be, full voting Treasury Committee members`

The 3 pre-allocated keyholders on TC: (1) Muneeb, (2) Alex, (3) Mitchell are also part of the 8 "appointed from the Stacks community per the process" 

Clarification needed: Do they serve the **4 year terms** or **serve indefinite terms**?

**Treasury Committee Appointments**: After the initial appointments, at each appointment period, the Stacks Endowment shall publish desired criteria for Treasury Committee members and, after consultation with and nominations from the Stacks community, prepare a final list of proposed Treasury Committee members for the open seats. This proposed set of members must then be approved by a SIP vote, with at least 2/3rds of votes in support.

If a member steps down, or is removed, the remaining members of the Treasury Committee shall appoint a replacement to fill their seat for the remainder of their term by a 2/3rds vote. Additionally, any member may be removed for failing to fulfill their duties or violating their responsibilities to the Committee by a 2/3rds vote of the Committee.

**Initial Appointments**: To appoint members to the five open seats on the Treasury Committee, a temporary Appointments Committee will be formed to make these appointments. The Appointments Committee will fill the open seats within 60 days of the SIP being approved.

> **NOTE THIS SECTION WILL BE UPDATED AT THE SUMMATION OF THE [ONGOING APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE WORKSHOPS](https://forum.stacks.org/t/workshops-sip-031-appointments-committee/18141/9), EXPECTED BY 6/20**

Reviewer: Tagging for update

Reviewer 5: this has been updated now

## Operational Structure

Along with the creation of the necessary capital for growth, there is an opportunity to unlock additional efficiency and flexibility for key contributors as they work to support ecosystem growth. This section of the SIP will dive into the proposed structure by which the ecosystem can consolidate some key functions while maintaining decentralization and community-driven governance. This operational structure goes hand-in-hand with the new treasury, providing a framework that ensures the new capital is always operating in line with the will of the community, while remaining flexible in the ways that it can serve ecosystem needs.

Of course, it also remains committed to the deepest levels of compliance while seeking to provide the maximum protection and clarity possible to all stakeholders and contributors by following current legal best practices. This proposed structure has been developed in line with the best practices from the last 5+ years of legal and financial experience in the crypto industry.

> ### Current issues for key contributors

Reviewer: I'm on the fence here on if this whole section should be in the SIP. the reasoning follows the argumetn in https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/files#r2159820938. basically, when i think about if this SIP passes or fails, would that mean that this defined org (which the Stacks Endowment would create as a first order of business, were to pass) **cannot** be created?

i don't think that's true. it's good to enumerate the details about this new org, but I don't see it as having any bearing on the creation or execution of an endowment. 

what if a change were made to add details on this new org as supplemental file to help inform readers of what the first order of action may be, but not tie this org to a SIP vote?

Reviewer 5: This general idea came up in a couple different places but I think its easiest for the reader to just keep everything in this one document - plus even if a SIP proposes something and it doesn't pass, I dont think that it means that think can't happen, just that it is not happening as a result of that SIP vote (either its re-worked in a non-consensus way or its re-proposed later).

### Ecosystem Structure: Roles and Responsibilities
To ensure clarity and optimize operations, this SIP calls for three primary organizations with distinct responsibilities. These organizations will comprise a mix of established contributors from the primary organizations seeding capital and new hires.

### Proposed Ecosystem Structure

**1\. Allocation / Money: The Stacks Endowment**

* **Focus:** Management of the Stacks Endowment, strategic fund allocation, and financial stewardship.  
* **Responsibilities:**  
  * Manage a diversified portfolio of assets (STX, BTC, USD) held within the Stacks Endowment.  
  * Manage grants programs and provide technical support for ecosystem projects.  
  * Review and approve funding proposals from the Ops Entity, ecosystem community projects, and other initiatives.  
  * Oversee risk management, compliance, and audit processes for the Treasury.

**2\. Day-to-Day Execution: A New Operational Entity**

* **Focus:** Technology development, ecosystem operations and growth, and core initiatives.  

> * **Responsibilities*:***  

Reviewer 10: Typo -- extra *

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Responsibilities**:*  
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Responsibilities:**  
```

**The proposed structure offers several key advantages:**

* **Consolidated Resource Management:** Consolidating the treasury within the Stacks Endowment ensures efficient allocation of funds to the most critical needs of the ecosystem.  
* **Strategic Funding:** Allocating funds across operations, engagement, growth, incentives, and working capital enables a balanced approach to ecosystem development.  
* **Long-Term Sustainability:** Managing the treasury with a diversified portfolio provides financial stability and ensures the availability of resources for ongoing initiatives.  
* **Clear Responsibilities:** Defining the roles and responsibilities of the Stacks Endowment and its relationship with other organizations, such as the new operational entity, clarifies accountability and promotes efficient collaboration.

This clear division of responsibilities allows each group to focus on its core competencies, leading to a more efficient, effective, and sustainable ecosystem for Stacks. The Endowment staff will prepare an annual public report detailing how the Endowment's resources were allocated for the prior year and the impact of those allocations.

> #### Impact on key contributing organizations

Reviewer: agreed - resolving this, and we may continue in that comment

For known organizations, it is useful to reflect on expected changes that would go with this proposal:

**Remains independent:**
* **Stacks Foundation** \- As noted above, the Stacks Foundation will narrow its focus on facilitating Governance of the ecosystem (in particular via the SIP process) and ensuring the community’s voice is heard.  
* **Hiro Systems** \- Hiro will continue as an independent entity focusing on developer tooling.  
* **Trust Machines \-** Trust Machines will continue to incubate and develop applications for Stacks & Bitcoin.  
* **Bitcoin Frontier Fund (formerly Stacks Accelerator)** \- No impact or changes.

**Likely to become part of, or share back-office resources:**

> * **Bitcoin L2 Labs** \- Given the current focus of Bitcoin L2 Labs on core development, it will likely become part of the new operational entity, with Adriano continuing to lead engineering efforts.  

Reviewer 10: > with Adriano continuing to lead engineering efforts. 

I think this should be dropped.  This is the only place Adriano is mentioned (and not even by full-name, nor with any qualifications on what his role will be).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Bitcoin L2 Labs** \- Given the current focus of Bitcoin L2 Labs on core development, it will likely become part of the new operational entity.  
```

This SIP proposes a bold course forward in growing the Stacks ecosystem, which does not come without potential risks and considerations.

**1\. Fundraising Execution Risk**  
The Endowment’s ambitious five-year fundraising target of $405M, primarily through structured token sales, is subject to significant market timing risk. Prolonged bear markets could constrain fundraising opportunities, while the 7% annual inflation cap limits flexibility in adjusting to adverse conditions. Achieving funding goals will require carefully aligning operational cash flow needs with favorable market conditions—an inherently uncertain task. To manage this, the Endowment intends to maintain a dynamic approach to fundraising, adjusting cadence and scale based on prevailing market signals and community consensus (see Nomiks report for more detail).

**2\. Operational Execution Risk**  
Raising funds alone does not guarantee success. The core objective is to drive meaningful product and ecosystem growth, which carries execution risk. Even with sufficient capital and governance safeguards, outcomes depend on effective leadership and strategic decisions.

**3\. Token Supply and Market Impact**  

> While there have been extensive consultations with capital markets experts and the adoption of best practices to manage treasury operations responsibly, long-term token issuance introduces uncertainty regarding market impact. Macro conditions and market sentiment will influence the price of STX in ways that are difficult to predict. Should STX remain below $1 for an extended period, the Endowment may need to scale back spending or extend its fundraising timeline to preserve capital and uphold fiscal discipline. Relatedly, the fund's sustainability is tied to STX price performance, with treasury depletion timelines varying based on token value. At sustained low prices ($0.50-$1.00), the treasury could be exhausted within 1-2 years due to the $80M annual fixed USD expenses requiring more token sales to meet obligations. This creates operational inflexibility during market downturns when cost reductions may not scale proportionally with declining treasury value.

Reviewer 5: That's correct, there are not 80m in fixed expenses, just projected, but would be adjusted based on the reality of the situation

> While there have been extensive consultations with capital markets experts and the adoption of best practices to manage treasury operations responsibly, long-term token issuance introduces uncertainty regarding market impact. Macro conditions and market sentiment will influence the price of STX in ways that are difficult to predict. Should STX remain below $1 for an extended period, the Endowment may need to scale back spending or extend its fundraising timeline to preserve capital and uphold fiscal discipline. Relatedly, the fund's sustainability is tied to STX price performance, with treasury depletion timelines varying based on token value. At sustained low prices ($0.50-$1.00), the treasury could be exhausted within 1-2 years due to the $80M annual fixed USD expenses requiring more token sales to meet obligations. This creates operational inflexibility during market downturns when cost reductions may not scale proportionally with declining treasury value.

Reviewer 3: Hi @alexlmiller  I think what could be clearer would be something like below. To convey the fixed USD was for modelling purpose, but in reality it's not fixed. 

`Nomiks modeling based on $80M in annual fixed USD expenses suggests that if STX prices remained low ($0.50–$1.00), the treasury could be exhausted within 1–2 years, since more tokens would need to be sold to meet obligations. In reality, expenses are not fixed and could be adjusted in response to market conditions.`

**Ecosystem Reputational Risk:** There is much debate in the crypto industry over the appropriateness of changing the rates of emissions, particularly among the Bitcoin community. While Stacks is intended as a gas token for operating the network, there is the possibility that the ecosystem will receive criticism or attack for creating a treasury via emissions after the mainnet launch.

**Appearance of Centralization:** Creating a single Endowment may also be interpreted as being overly centralized. To mitigate this, the structure proposed in this SIP is designed to maintain decentralized governance around the key aspects of control and require clear, accountable reporting to the community.

**Stacks Unique Position:** While many other ecosystems have changed emissions schedules or created treasuries to fund growth, there is no exact 1:1 corollary we can look to of an ecosystem with Stacks’ unique history and position in the market to predict how this will ultimately be viewed. This is an inherent risk of making a bold attempt at something.

> ## Summary of benefits

Reviewer: Isn't this whole section repeating arguments *For* submitting this SIP?
I don't disagree it's important, but at most i would argue this section should be supplemental, and removed from the main text.

Reviewer 5: yes, this is just breaking things down for people in a different format to make sure its clear and accessible to folks

Reviewer: I see the intent for sure, but I don't think it's useful in this design document (which is why I mentioned supplemental materials). take this single example: `Faster access to quality apps and DeFi protocols boasting deep liquidity`

what does this mean, and how shall it be measured as true or false? additionally, by what measurement is an app "quality" or not?

when i think about what a SIP proposes - i look at it with a lens of "do the arguments lead to this conclusion?" and "is this argument either true or false, and how?" and when i consider listed benefits like the above, either it can't be something that is true/false or it would need a lot more information to verify.

> *Other ecosystems that updated their treasury operations and allocated material growth funding have successfully unlocked new products, achieved roadmap milestones, improved liquidity, and enabled real-time, transparent funding for builders-outcomes that are now considered essential for ecosystem leadership.*

> > - **RENDER**: Render replaced $RENDER payments with a burn-and-mint equilibrium (BME) model to boost efficiency and sustainability in their decentralized GPU rendering marketplace. This update involved a planned increase of the total supply by about 20%, to be released in small batches (never exceeding 10% per year). The BME model has been live since December 2023, and within one year, it nearly tripled on-chain network usage compared to 2023\.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **RENDER**: Render replaced $RENDER payments with a burn-and-mint equilibrium (BME) model to boost efficiency and sustainability in their decentralized GPU rendering marketplace. This update involved a planned increase of the total supply by about 20%, to be released in small batches (never exceeding 10% per year). The BME model has been live since December 2023, and within one year, it nearly tripled on-chain network usage compared to 2023\.
```

   1. **Months 1-11:** 475 STX per anchor block  
   2. **Months 12-23:** 1,140 STX per anchor block  
   3. **Months 24-35:** 1,705 STX per anchor block  
   4. **Months 36-47:** 1,305 STX per anchor block  
   5. **Months 48-60:** 1,155 STX per anchor block

The Endowment will maintain and publish a primary mint address that all funds will flow to before being deployed. There are potential options to further sustain the treasury that are not in scope of this SIP via protocol revenue paths that can be considered separately, but there are not further treasury mints beyond this endowment. See [Stacks Economic Model](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035) for more details.

#### Economic Analysis & Impact

As part of the preparation and design of this SIP, the Stacks Foundation contracted an outside tokenomics firm to conduct research on the viability of raising and deploying a treasury of this size. Nomiks ([nomiks.io](https://www.nomiks.io/)) was chosen based on their track record and quality of referrals from trusted advisors.

> **Economic Analysis & Strategy**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Economic Analysis & Strategy
```

* Conservatively deploying capital in early days to ensure funds remain available

**Inflation Impact**

Nomiks’ proposed emissions and conversion programs were designed with the goal of keeping Stacks’ annual inflation (including the existing coinbase reward for miners) below that of most other Top 50 projects, which have a median inflation rate of **10.18%**, as seen on [this sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1pwZtoU4E6RXXxCw9gW225TJnD4W_Xu3B2WGhqe21O9o/edit?usp=sharing).

Given that current PoX inflation rates are 3.52%, the goal is to have Stacks remain below **7%** average annual inflation from all sources (both mining and new emissions combined) over the next 5 years, which is well below the **10%** of other ecosystems from above.

Not including the initial mint, the total inflation rate for each of the 5 years of emissions and unlocks is as follows:

| Year | Total STX Emissions (incl Treasury & PoX) |
| --- | --- |
| Year 1 | 7% |
| Year 2 | 7% |
| Year 3 | 7% |
| Year 4 | 4.25% |
| Year 5 | 3.50% |
| Average Yearly Emissions | 5.75% |

Once the minting is complete, annual inflation for STX will be \<2%.

> > 📈 The full report from Nomiks can be seen **[here](https://forum.stacks.org/uploads/short-url/pgKEv8ljXuWpCC1GnkyIi3pD8SV.pdf)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The full report from Nomiks can be seen **[here](https://forum.stacks.org/uploads/short-url/pgKEv8ljXuWpCC1GnkyIi3pD8SV.pdf)**
```

#### Treasury Strategy & Operations
The new treasury will act similarly to an endowment for the ecosystem, balancing immediate needs with long-term growth. In its early years, some principal may be used to advance its mission until network growth and future revenue streams can sustain ongoing operations.

To support this vision, the Stacks Endowment will follow a diversified funding strategy centered on long-term sustainability and ecosystem development.

* The treasury will primarily be funded with STX initially, then diversified into a portfolio primarily composed of STX, BTC, and USD.  
* An experienced Chief Investment Officer (CIO) will be hired to manage the Endowment, with independence from any other Stacks entities.  
* While the CIO will shape the detailed approach, the strategy is expected to blend Stacks DeFi deployments, capital market activities, and high-quality, low-risk interest-bearing investments.  
* The Stacks Endowment will publish annual public reports detailing the treasury’s status, deployment strategies, impact, and transparent audit trails, with transactions conducted on-chain whenever possible.

> **Enhanced Financial Flexibility**: The creation of a Stacks Endowment brings greater financial flexibility to the ecosystem, moving beyond the constraints of previous token sales. This structure enables more effective financial planning and strategic resource allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Enhanced Financial Flexibility
The creation of a Stacks Endowment brings greater financial flexibility to the ecosystem, moving beyond the constraints of previous token sales. This structure enables more effective financial planning and strategic resource allocation.
```

**Treasury Committee Appointments**: After the initial appointments, at each appointment period, the Stacks Endowment shall publish desired criteria for Treasury Committee members and, after consultation with and nominations from the Stacks community, prepare a final list of proposed Treasury Committee members for the open seats. This proposed set of members must then be approved by a SIP vote, with at least 2/3rds of votes in support.

If a member steps down, or is removed, the remaining members of the Treasury Committee shall appoint a replacement to fill their seat for the remainder of their term by a 2/3rds vote. Additionally, any member may be removed for failing to fulfill their duties or violating their responsibilities to the Committee by a 2/3rds vote of the Committee.

**Initial Appointments**: To appoint members to the five open seats on the Treasury Committee, a temporary Appointments Committee will be formed to make these appointments. The Appointments Committee will fill the open seats within 60 days of the SIP being approved.

> > **NOTE THIS SECTION WILL BE UPDATED AT THE SUMMATION OF THE [ONGOING APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE WORKSHOPS](https://forum.stacks.org/t/workshops-sip-031-appointments-committee/18141/9), EXPECTED BY 6/20**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE THIS SECTION WILL BE UPDATED AT THE SUMMATION OF THE [ONGOING APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE WORKSHOPS](https://forum.stacks.org/t/workshops-sip-031-appointments-committee/18141/9), EXPECTED BY 6/20**
```

* The legal formation of both entities will be completed within 60 days of SIP approval. The research for this proposal has resulted in a significant head start on these requirements.  
* The Appointments Committee will fill the remaining seats based on community nominations, opening these nominations within 60 days of SIP approval.  
* Leadership searches for the Stacks Endowment (CIO) and operational entity (CEO) will commence, with positions posted publicly within 60 days.  
* The new operational entity, in collaboration with the Stacks Endowment and Stacks Builders will finalize details of a retroactive grants program that will focus on growth, enabling predictable capital relative to measurable impact to the ecosystem, such as user, TVL, or other growth indicators.  
* Grant applications for critical work in the very short term will be opened by the Stacks Endowment, likely leveraging support from the Stacks Foundation’s team and systems. The goal of these grants is to serve any short-term critical needs or opportunities in the initial 90 days of the Endowment's existence until a more formal program can be deployed, including the aforementioned retroactive grant program.

> ## **Voting Timeline**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Voting Timeline
```

The voting timeline will be finalized via community discussion. Pending final results from the Appointments Committee, current sentiment is that voting could start June 24. 

> 

Reviewer: I think this can be removed. once the timeline is chosen, it should be specified in the Activation section

Author: Sounds good

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

# Preamble

**SIP Number:** 031

**Title:** SIP-031: Five-Year Stacks Growth Emissions

**Author(s):**
- Mitchell Cuevas (Stacks Foundation)
- Alex Miller (Hiro)
- Tycho Onnasch (Zest)
- Jakob Schillinger (Hermetica)
- Andre Serrano (Bitcoin L2 Labs)

> - Dylan Floyd (Bitflow)

Reviewer: Orgs are not needed here: `A list of names and email addresses of the SIP's author(s).`

Reviewer: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-000/sip-000-stacks-improvement-proposal-process.md?plain=1#L117

> **Type:** Economic, Governance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type: Economic, Governance
```

> **Status:** Draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status: Draft
```

> **Created:** 6/12/2025

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Created: 6/12/2025
```

**License:** To be determined

> **Sign-off:** Pending

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sign-off: Pending
```

> **Discussions:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussions:
```

- [[DRAFT] Fueling Stacks Builders & Growth, Meet SIP-031](https://forum.stacks.org/t/draft-fueling-stacks-builders-growth-meet-sip-031/18060/)
- [SIP 31.1 - A New Draft Arrives](https://forum.stacks.org/t/sip-31-1-a-new-draft-arrives/18130 )
- [Workshops: SIP-031 Appointments Committee](https://forum.stacks.org/t/workshops-sip-031-appointments-committee/18141/8 )
  

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Abstract

> * Stacks’ goal as an ecosystem is to empower the creation of the Bitcoin economy \- we envision that all projects that want to build on Bitcoin, from DeFi to gaming, memecoins to NFTs, and marketplaces to identity, should be built on top of Stacks.  

Reviewer 10: Formatting: Is there a reason these are all bullet points, and not just a paragraph?

Also, I'm not sure I'm comfortable with the seemingly exclusionary language that all Bitcoin projects should be built on Stacks.  I think Stacks should strive to be the best possible platform upon which to build, but that's something we have to earn.

* Stacks is transitioning from a tech-first to a traction-first phase, fueled by a new endowment and streamlined operations.  
* The proposal raises fresh capital to put Stacks on par with other top projects, addressing historic underfunding and unlocking the ability to compete at scale.  
* A new operational entity will scale execution, while a community-governed endowment ensures transparent, accountable, and sustainable growth.  

> * This is Stacks’ decisive step to accelerate adoption, empower builders of all sizes, and drive long-term value for all stakeholders.  

Reviewer 10: Wordsmitthing -- it's not possible to know if this step is "decisive" since determining this can only be done in hindsight.  It's certainly a significant step though.

* Upcoming protocol upgrades will further reinforce sustainability by enabling a portion of future protocol revenue to support the Stacks Endowment, ensuring ongoing value accrual for the ecosystem.

> This SIP proposes a “best of both worlds” approach to the next phase of growth for Stacks \- maintaining our decentralized governance while creating a new streamlined operational structure and Endowment to fuel driving Stacks to being a Top 10 ecosystem as the home of the Bitcoin economy.

Reviewer 10: "Top 10" according to whom?

Reviewer 10: Wordsmithing -- What are the two worlds referred to here?  Do you mean something more generic, like "best in class approach" or "hybrid approach" or the like?

Author: Top ten by market cap

The two worlds is explained, getting the benefits of decentralized governance at the same time as thoughtfully consolidated operations where applicable. This messaging is widely understood in community.

Author: Why do you guys think that an aspirational statement about being a top 10 project by market cap is a 'legal risk'? No less than 5 lawyers have reviewed this and didn't flag that as a concern so just curious where this comes from for you. 

I'd be more fine with changing the language if the community didn't express their specific support for the notion of 'go big or go home'. I think making a clear statement about where want to go is germane to this SIP as it is intended to be the fuel needed to get there. More vague notions of success don't really have the same rallying effect. 

I'd be fine changing this in the SIP if you want to manage any community backlash about backing off this strong statement @Hero-Gamer

Author: I'm saying changing it at this point would be where the backlash would come from. The community is especially excited about taking a strong stance about where we want to be, so removing it can erode some of that, in my opinion. If you think we can get away with something less specific or more watered-down, I welcome your suggestions.

Reviewer 10: > Top ten by market cap

Thanks; that's what I thought.  The SIP text should explicitly say that, and should also reference which list we intend to look at to determine if we meet this goal.  For example, "Top 10 by market cap as measured via coinmarketcap.com"

Reviewer 5: I agree with mitchell here - this is a purely aspirational statement intended to give a rough sense of the scale of the expected impact of doing this - it's not a fulfillment standard in a contract that somebody needs to point to in order to get paid for not. Multiple lawyers reviewed the language and had no issue with it as it stands

Reviewer 5: Integrating tweak to last sentence per @wileyj suggestion

```suggestion
This SIP proposes a “best of both worlds” approach to the next phase of growth for Stacks \- maintaining our decentralized governance while creating a new streamlined operational structure and endowment to fuel driving Stacks to being the home of the Bitcoin economy and a Top 10 ecosystem by market cap.
```

Specifically, it will create a dedicated Stacks Endowment to manage a consolidated STX treasury focused on ecosystem growth. The treasury will be created through ongoing token emissions over the next five years and seed STX transfers from key contributors. The new proposed structure will allow for more efficient execution among contributors by organizing efforts around a new operational entity that will provide both the capital and structure needed to make strategic investments in user and builder focused incentives, additional development capacity, security, marketing, liquidity, and business development initiatives needed to fuel the Stacks ecosystem during this next phase of growth.

> This SIP is both a direct response to feedback from builders expressing their evolving needs as Stacks scales and a recognition of the opportunity to realign structures with the current regulatory and competitive landscape. The SIP is further informed by practical experience gained over 6 years since the establishment of the ecosystem, solving for the day-to-day frictions and blockers that emerged as overhead over time given the lack of clear structure for a decentralized ecosystem. Finally, the SIP leverages legal experts, third party research, and a series of artifacts and reports to illustrate these changes will benefit the ecosystem stakeholders.

Reviewer 10: Why does the "current regulatory landscape" need to be mentioned?  I'm assuming you mean the US regulatory landscape?  Does this imply that there will be a future SIP if the regulatory landscape in the US shifts again?

Reviewer 5: @jcnelson not exclusively US landscape, thats obviously a big one but there's been a lot of regulatory evolution in the last 8 years

@wileyj most of this would be from conversations over time, there's not a single (or even collected set of multiple specific) conversation from it.

As with other parts of the SIP this is simply context for the reader on what to expect further in and greater details is provided for this things throughout.

> In sum, this SIP proposes a framework for continued success as the leading Bitcoin L2, using the “hook” of Bitcoin DeFi to pull in users and liquidity while sustainably increasing the resources and efficiency with which to enable all contributors, builders, and holders as the Stacks ecosystem continues to activate the Bitcoin economy to onboard the next billion users to bitcoin across all use cases.

Reviewer 10: I'm not sure I understand how Bitcoin DeFi is a "hook?"  I thought large amounts of liquidity was the most significant attractor of new project talent to a blockchain?

Reviewer 10: First, regardless of the intent of this text, the wording here is ambiguous since it uses a colloquial expression (which readers, especially non-English ones, may not correctly interpret).  A less-ambiguous way to say it would be "...using Bitcoin DeFi to attract users and liquidity..."

Second,

>  Sure, but you need a reason for the liquidity to enter that isn't simply inorganically paying for it. 

I don't think this is what we meant to say either, because increasing the supply of STX by itself certainly isn't an organic way to attract more capital.

> DeFi, as seen in other successfu ecosystems, is the hook for said capital and users to enter.

Then, I think the text meant to say something like this

"""
This SIP proposes a framework for attracting users and liquidity to Stacks by means of growing its native ecosystem of Bitcoin DeFi applications. We expect the growth of the Stacks-native Bitcoin DeFi ecosystem to drive the growth of all other facets of the Stacks application ecosystem, because the growth of native DeFi in other blockchains has driven the growth of their respective ecosystems.  To drive the growth of Bitcoin DeFi on Stacks, this SIP proposes a new community-governed STX treasury, sustainably funded via a modified token emission schedule which leaves the Stacks blockchain with a still-modest inflation rate with the option to burn excess tokens.  The goal of this treasury is to grow the Stacks ecosystem to 1 billion users.
"""

Reviewer 5: Modifying the text a bit in line with @jcnelson suggestions

```suggestion
This SIP proposes a framework for continued success as the leading Bitcoin L2, using the initial draw of Bitcoin DeFi to attract the users and liquidity needed to grow a vibrant ecosystem of all types of applications. To do this, this SIP proposes a new community-governed STX treasury, sustainably funded via a modified token emission schedule which leaves the Stacks blockchain with a still-modest inflation rate with the option to burn excess tokens, while enabling all contributors, builders, and holders to activate the Bitcoin economy to onboard the next billion users to bitcoin.
```

# Introduction

> The Stacks ecosystem is entering a new phase of growth, made possible by critical network upgrades in 2024, including [Nakamoto](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-021/sip-021-nakamoto.md) and [sBTC](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-028/sip-028-sbtc_peg.md). With sBTC, the network enables Bitcoin to be used in everyday economic activity beyond just holding, with further integrations, partnerships, and growth efforts supporting multiple emerging Bitcoin use cases. To meet this opportunity, this SIP proposes the creation of a new growth-focused treasury and a streamlined structure for increased operational efficiency in the ecosystem.

Author: I don't think the SIP needs to try and list specific use cases in this context. Listing some before,  the community concern was that we favored them over others when we do not - this is this has been generalized to what you see here. All use cases will require capital and capital is one of the primary goals of the SIP, we're not dictating here which will be the focus.

> The Stacks ecosystem is entering a new phase of growth, made possible by critical network upgrades in 2024, including [Nakamoto](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-021/sip-021-nakamoto.md) and [sBTC](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-028/sip-028-sbtc_peg.md). With sBTC, the network enables Bitcoin to be used in everyday economic activity beyond just holding, with further integrations, partnerships, and growth efforts supporting multiple emerging Bitcoin use cases. To meet this opportunity, this SIP proposes the creation of a new growth-focused treasury and a streamlined structure for increased operational efficiency in the ecosystem.

Reviewer 10: The reason I flagged this is because it sounds like we're attacking a straw man.  Today, without the help of an L2, Bitcoin is not limited to "just holding," and we would look ignorant in the eyes of a reader who saw us promoting sBTC as superior to BTC because you can "just hold" BTC (but do more things with sBTC).

Generalization works for me too, given the feedback you received.  In that case, you could replace "beyond just holding" with "via smart contracts," which is both correct and general.

> The Stacks ecosystem is entering a new phase of growth, made possible by critical network upgrades in 2024, including [Nakamoto](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-021/sip-021-nakamoto.md) and [sBTC](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-028/sip-028-sbtc_peg.md). With sBTC, the network enables Bitcoin to be used in everyday economic activity beyond just holding, with further integrations, partnerships, and growth efforts supporting multiple emerging Bitcoin use cases. To meet this opportunity, this SIP proposes the creation of a new growth-focused treasury and a streamlined structure for increased operational efficiency in the ecosystem.

Reviewer 5: My thought is to change to 

```suggestion
The Stacks ecosystem is entering a new phase of growth, made possible by critical network upgrades in 2024, including [Nakamoto](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-021/sip-021-nakamoto.md) and [sBTC](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-028/sip-028-sbtc_peg.md). With sBTC, the network enables Bitcoin to be used in everyday economic activity beyond the scale and capability availabe on the Bitcoin L1, with further integrations, partnerships, and growth efforts supporting multiple emerging Bitcoin use cases. To meet this opportunity, this SIP proposes the creation of a new growth-focused treasury and a streamlined structure for increased operational efficiency in the ecosystem.
```

# License and Copyright

> To be determined

Reviewer: Since this SIP contains no licensable code, i would recommend:

```suggestion
This SIP is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons CC0 1.0
Universal license, available at
https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ This SIP’s copyright is held
by the Stacks Open Internet Foundation.
```

this aligns with the Preamble suggestion to use creative commons

> # Problem Statement

Reviewer: Should this be part of the Introduction as a sub-header? 
```suggestion
## Problem Statement
```

* **Underfunded relative to competitors:** Stacks raised \~$80M over six years ago — less than most top 50 projects, despite increased demands from sBTC launch, bitcoin DeFi applications, and new protocol upgrades like Stacks Nakamoto launch.  
* **Operational fragmentation:** Ecosystem contributors like the Stacks Foundation, Hiro, and others have operated independently, often duplicating efforts and constrained by compliance overhead inherited from the SEC-qualified sale.  
* **Restricted access to growth levers:** Compliance concerns with unclear guides have prevented key actors from engaging in essential ecosystem activities, particularly those focused on growth activities, including marketing, various types of incentives, and more, slowing down growth of the Stacks ecosystem.  
* **Limited resources for builders:** Given the small size of resources available to the Stacks Foundation and other entities, developers launching Stacks-based applications lack predictable access to incentives, grants, and liquidity support — creating friction in growth and onboarding.

> ### **Proposed Solution**

Reviewer: The header syntax here is incorrect. i'm assuming it's meant to be a sub-header of `# Introduction` though:

```suggestion
## Proposed Solution
```

To address these limitations, this SIP proposes the creation of an ecosystem endowment and a new operating entity to streamline coordination and enable well-capitalized growth:

> * **Create a STX ecosystem endowment:** This consolidated treasury will be funded through a combination of transfers from existing entities and new emissions over the next 5 years that temporarily bring Stacks’ total annual emissions from 3.52% to an average of 5.75% per year. A new Endowment Foundation — set up specifically to manage this treasury — will deploy capital across grants, incentives, security, liquidity, and marketing programs to accelerate adoption.  

Reviewer 10: Wordsmithing -- this specific point about an ecosystem endowment is a restatement of the general goal mentioned in the preceding sentence.

* **Consolidate certain operational areas under a new operational entity:** A streamlined entity focused on contributing to protocol development, go-to-market support, and ecosystem growth, absorbing responsibilities from multiple legacy organizations into a single operational hub to be a major contributor to these areas in the broader ecosystem.  
* **Enable greater capital efficiency at scale:** The new treasury will enable meaningful STX liquidity programs, user incentives, and core development funding at a scale previously unavailable to Stacks while increasing accountability to community members.  

> * **Commitment to transparent governance:** The community's governance over the open source ecosystem is unchanged, retaining control over all aspects of Stacks technical and ecosystem development via SIPs. The Endowment entity, free of restrictions placed on the current foundation and others, will also be able to provide a more granular level of financial reporting. The community is the key stakeholder and guide for the Endowment.

Reviewer 10: It might be worth mentioning at this point that the endowment's STX tokens cannot be used for SIP voting, to emphasize that this does not immediately alter the system's governance.  Note also that future SIPs may, in their Activation sections, explicitly exclude STX that was recently distributed from the endowment from voting (e.g. for a year).

Reviewer 5: @jcnelson The SIP already says in two separate places that the Endowment's tokens won't be voted in SIPs, not sure why it needs to be added a third time

Reviewer 10: Oh, I'm only suggesting saying this up-front as part of what we mean by "commitment to transparent governance." Then, it only needs to be said once.

Together, these changes will give the Stacks ecosystem the capital, execution speed, and organizational clarity required to compete with top ecosystems — ensuring that Stacks can continue to lead and aggressively grow market share as the leading Bitcoin L2; unlocking long-term value for builders, users, and holders.

### **Stacks Roadmap Summary**

This treasury will fuel development along the [Stacks roadmap](http://stacksroadmap.com), which has been refreshed via a series of [community workshops](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984) ([1](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-roadmap-draft-final-call-community-feedback/17984)), the latest version of which has been published in support of this SIP. The treasury will be created to deliver on these and other priorities as defined by builders and key stakeholders and provide the necessary resources for Stacks’ progression in the following critical areas, among others:

**1\. Stacks Core Development:**

> Upgrades to increase transaction speed, reliability, scalability, and security — including improved block production, miner replay logic, Clarity-to-Wasm compilation, ongoing enhancements to PoX and stacking UX, security bounties, audits, and monitoring.

Reviewer 10: Grammar:  This isn't a sentence.

**2\. sBTC Protocol & Stacks Value Accrual:**

> Treasury funding will also support the development of new mechanisms that drive STX demand such as dual stacking, bitcoin payments use cases, and BTC yield strategies — as well as continued development of critical sBTC features like self-custodial minting and upgrades for further trust-minimization. By funding these areas, the Endowment aims to create a self-reinforcing flywheel where protocol revenue grows treasury reserves → reserves fund development and adoption → adoption increases protocol usage and STX demand → drives continued revenue growth. This model provides a sustainable path for long-term operations and Stacks ecosystem growth.

Reviewer 10: Wordsmithing: Bitcoin is captialized

Also, what's "dual stacking?"  Do you mean "dual staking?"  And if so, can this be defined in a glossary somewhere?

Reviewer 10: Instead of using "->", can you write out what you mean?

Reviewer 5: Dual stacking is included in the roadmap with a fair amount of detail (as are the other referenced features here).

I think the arrow format is clear and both a generally used concept showing the idea of "leading to" something without having to repeatedly write it out

Reviewer 10: > Dual stacking is included in the roadmap with a fair amount of detail (as are the other referenced features here).

Great!

Other SIPs (e.g. sBTC) simply include a glossary so the reader does not need to reference the supplementary material.  If that's too much of a hassle, then perhaps a reference here to the definition in the supplementary material would be appropriate?  Either one is fine with me, but "dual stacking" without any subsequent hints just looks like a typo for "dual staking" for someone who's new to this ecosystem.

> I think the arrow format is clear and both a generally used concept showing the idea of "leading to" something without having to repeatedly write it out

We're generally pretty strict about making sure that the SIP text is unambiguous and complete.  This is the first I've seen text elision in any SIP by means of a graphical symbol (also, we haven't accepted SIPs with emoji text).

**3\. Ecosystem Growth:**

Strategic efforts to scale TVL, liquidity, and user adoption through community based marketing and growth strategies, grant programs, DeFi incentives, sBTC TVL milestones, stablecoin integrations, and centralized exchange listings for SIP-10 tokens.

> This roadmap reflects the core areas where capital from the Stacks endowment will be deployed if SIP-031 is approved — focusing on core protocol upgrades, institutional support, developer traction, and Stacks value accrual.

Reviewer 10: Wordsmithing:  please be consistent in how you spell "endowment."  Is it "Stacks endowment" or "Endowment"?

### Key artifacts related to this SIP

> In preparing this SIP, the authors have gathered essential information to help Stacks holders provide informed feedback and make confident voting decisions. Inside, you’ll find summaries and links to:

Reviewer 10: Wordsmithing: SIPs don't use the second person ("you'll")

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In preparing this SIP, the authors have gathered essential information to help Stacks holders provide informed feedback and make confident voting decisions. Inside, are summaries and links to:
```

> * A complete economic impact study, performed by a neutral 3rd party token economics research firm. (LINK)  

Reviewer: fairly certain it's referring to this: https://forum.stacks.org/uploads/short-url/pgKEv8ljXuWpCC1GnkyIi3pD8SV.pdf

i think i can address that

> * A complete economic impact study, performed by a neutral 3rd party token economics research firm. (LINK)  

Reviewer: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/files#r2157641415

> * The latest iteration of the Stacks Roadmap, containing the sum total of feedback and input from the community over the past 3-months for core development on Stacks supporting a range of use cases ([stacksroadmap.com](https://stacksroadmap.com/))  

Reviewer 10: Grammar: "3-months" is not hyphenated

Reviewer: following my suggestion above, if links are annotated it could be referred to here as `[1]` for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The latest iteration of the Stacks Roadmap, containing the sum total of feedback and input from the community over the past 3 months for core development on Stacks supporting a range of use cases ([stacksroadmap.com](https://stacksroadmap.com/))  
```

* A Stacks DeFi growth plan, with a focus on short-term outcomes that can be driven by the new treasury. ([Stacks](https://forum.stacks.org/t/2025-roadmap-defi-road-to-1bn-defi-tvl/18032) [Forum](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035))  
* The next generation of sBTC, including technical design research ([Bitcoin L2 Labs](https://bitcoinl2labs.com/sbtc-design-principles))

These artifacts communicate where Stacks is headed and what it can achieve. They also provide clear context as to why this proposal is well-timed and will usher in an exciting new era of traction for Stacks.

### **Expected Benefits Of Approval**

**The solutions outlined in this proposal are designed to directly address the most pressing needs identified by those at the core of the Stacks ecosystem by:**

* Introducing operational efficiency in key functional areas through a new operational entity that serves as a major contributor for protocol development, community engagement & growth, global marketing, and capital markets.  

> * Unlocking capital essential for ecosystem and application growth.  

Reviewer 10: Do you mean "Raising capital?"

Reviewer 5: No, unlocking is in reference to it bringing in capital from outside the ecosystem that will participate in apps

Reviewer 10: Prior SIPs have used "unlocking" to refer to STX tokens becoming spendable over time (e.g. the Hiro treasury).  Can this text be updated to remove this ambiguity?  E.g. "Bringing in capital essential for ecosystem and application growth"

* Establishing dedicated resources and clear ownership in critical areas where the Stacks ecosystem has previously been unable, or only partially able, to participate (details on these areas follow below).  
* Enabling long-term ecosystem funding through smart treasury management and any future protocol revenue, aligning capitalization with the project’s caliber and the needs of its builders.

> Importantly, these changes are structured to preserve community oversight and governance, ensuring all processes and decisions remain transparent.

Reviewer 10: > ensuring all processes and decisions remain transparent.

Equally importantly, the new decision-making processes created by this SIP must remain just as _accountable_ to users as the ones we have in place today.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Importantly, these changes are structured to preserve community oversight and governance, ensuring all processes and decisions remain transparent and accountable to community members.
```

| Holders/Investors | *Improved market dynamics and token value potential through clearer communication and increased transparency about strategic treasury deployment and dedicated financial stewardship.* |
| Users | *Faster access to high-quality apps and DeFi opportunities powered by ecosystem-wide growth incentives and broader Stacks brand awareness.* |
| Contributing Entities | *Freedom to operate and scale without legacy constraints or fragmented operational overhead.* |
| Ecosystem Partners | *Streamlined integrations, additional capital, and clear ownership unlock faster go-to-market and deeper collaboration with the Stacks ecosystem.* |
| Casual Holders | *A stronger, more visible, and more valuable ecosystem with clearer communication, governance, and confidence in the long-term plan and resources required to execute it* |

Treasury deployment will be focused on accelerating sBTC adoption and driving Bitcoin capital onto the Stacks network in ways that directly reinforce the STX flywheel. For example:

> 1. Enabling dual-stacking can attract large BTC inflows while increasing demand for STX to unlock higher rewards.  

Reviewer 10: Flagging "dual-stacking" as an unknown term

2. Increasing usage of apps where users pay gas in sBTC drives up protocol transactions — each of which ultimately requires STX at the protocol layer.  
3. Similarly, enabling DeFi vaults with native liquidity pools ensures deeper markets for Stacks DeFi, which increases sBTC utility, boosts protocol revenue, and creates sustainable STX buy pressure while bringing new users and capital into the Stacks ecosystem to engage with the entire universe of Bitcoin apps built here.

In each case, targeted capital deployment turns ecosystem growth into protocol-level demand for STX.

> ### **Key SIP Design Principles**

Reviewer: Unless this is meant and as a sub-header of ## Proposed Solution, i think this change is needed:

```suggestion
##**Key SIP Design Principles**
```

> In putting this SIP together, there were a few clear guiding principles:

Reviewer 10: A better way to say this is "The proposal described in this SIP is guided by the following principles:"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The proposal described in this document is guided by the following principles:
```

2. **Adapting to growth.** Stacks has evolved well beyond its early (Blockstack days) origins, and the mission has expanded significantly thanks to the ecosystem’s success. This SIP aims to align with the current landscape and increased opportunities, recognizing that capital needs have grown alongside this broader scope.  
3. **Empowering builders.** The SIP should ensure that all Stacks builders, small & large, have access to strategic capital, resources, and execution they need for their given stage and focus. This support is a priority-unlocking faster go-to-market and scaling for high-potential projects within the ecosystem.  
4. **Strengthening accountability.** Mechanisms for community oversight of new entities are either maintained or improved, reflecting direct feedback from the community.  
5. **Balancing short- and long-term needs.** The SIP should address immediate priorities and sustainable, long-term capital required to grow the project for many decades.

### Maintaining Strong Decentralization

> The commitment to decentralization remains. Let’s quickly reflect on the questions originally asked when forming the current ecosystem: [https://blog.blockstack.org/the-stacks-ecosystem-next-steps-on-the-path-to-decentralization](https://blog.blockstack.org/the-stacks-ecosystem-next-steps-on-the-path-to-decentralization).

Reviewer 10: Grammar: SIPs don't use the first person ("Let's")

Reviewer: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/files#r2159671797

recommend that these lines be removed, and stick to the list of how this SIP doesn't change the current decentralization.

Reviewer 5: Revised the language in this section in this commit https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/commits/d38c6f1f92c8b7c3ef3ad1a2c22141f9a52a5f87

Some of the measures in place to ensure the ecosystem remains decentralized include:

* The technical operation of the blockchain is still fully decentralized based on the participation of miners and signers.  
* No one party has unique ownership or control to make changes to the blockchain and the code remains open-source and owned by the community.  
* The blockchain will still be governed by the same process administered by the Stacks Foundation and dependent on what miners and signers choose to do.  
* To further ensure the open governance process, the Stacks Endowment will not vote its tokens during SIP votes.  
* This SIP does not confer any unique protocol governance or technical decision-making capabilities to the new operational entity; its existence is merely as a contributor to the ecosystem with an explicit focus to de-duplicate back-end effort required to support development.

---

# Specification \[In 2 Parts\]

## **Part 1: The Stacks Endowment**

> This SIP calls for the creation of a new consolidated ecosystem Endowment which will be funded through a combination of STX transfers from existing entities and people, a one-time mint of 100m STX to provide initial working capital (that is, STX deployed by the Endowment but not released onto the open market), and build a longer term treasury through new emissions over the next 5 years that temporarily bring Stacks’ annual emissions from 3.52% to an average of 5.75% per year. This target was chosen by first estimating the total resources necessary to achieve the stated objectives in this SIP over the first 5 years of the Endowment (both STX and USD denominated amounts) based on comparisons to other Top 50 crypto ecosystems. Next, an economic report from a third party research firm (details and a link to the report are below) was commissioned to identify the likely value of the STX based on several different scenarios. Finally, the approximate number of STX needed, based on the likely value of the tokens to be converted, to meet the resourcing needs estimated.

Reviewer: Nit, but I'm a bit curious about the choice to capitalize `Endowment`. It seems inconsistent throughout the text (quick page search shows both endowment and Endowment being used). 

suggested change: i think `Stacks Endowment` or naming the specific org/structure can be caplitalized, but merely referring to a nebulous "endownment" should remain lower case.

> This SIP calls for the creation of a new consolidated ecosystem Endowment which will be funded through a combination of STX transfers from existing entities and people, a one-time mint of 100m STX to provide initial working capital (that is, STX deployed by the Endowment but not released onto the open market), and build a longer term treasury through new emissions over the next 5 years that temporarily bring Stacks’ annual emissions from 3.52% to an average of 5.75% per year. This target was chosen by first estimating the total resources necessary to achieve the stated objectives in this SIP over the first 5 years of the Endowment (both STX and USD denominated amounts) based on comparisons to other Top 50 crypto ecosystems. Next, an economic report from a third party research firm (details and a link to the report are below) was commissioned to identify the likely value of the STX based on several different scenarios. Finally, the approximate number of STX needed, based on the likely value of the tokens to be converted, to meet the resourcing needs estimated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This SIP calls for the creation of a new consolidated ecosystem Endowment which will be funded through a combination of STX transfers from existing entities and people, a one-time mint of 100m STX to provide initial working capital (that is, STX deployed by the Endowment but not released onto the open market), and build a longer term treasury through new emissions over the next 5 years that temporarily bring Stacks’ annual emissions from 3.52% to an average of 5.75% per year. This target was chosen by first estimating the total resources necessary to achieve the stated objectives in this SIP over the first 5 years of the Endowment (both STX and USD denominated amounts) based on comparisons to other Top 50 crypto ecosystems. Next, an economic report from a third party research firm (details and a link to the report are below) was commissioned to identify the likely value of the STX based on several different scenarios. Finally, the approximate number of STX needed was calculated, based on the likely value of the tokens to be converted, to meet the resourcing needs estimated.
```

> The Endowment plan also includes a model that mitigates the short-term impact on STX holders (including by not having the early minted tokens be released onto the market) and, via a deep economic study, accounts for the primary risks typically associated with increased inflation. The mechanics of treasury creation are covered in more detail below.

Reviewer 10: Isn't this just repeating a sentence in the above paragraph?

Reviewer 5: Are you referring to 174 vs 176 here? If so, they aren't duplicative, in that 174 is referring to the report helping calculate how much was needed and 176 is referring to the part where its looking at how to release them in an impact-minimizing way

> No further treasury mints are planned beyond this endowment and there is consideration for introducing a token burn mechanism to burn STX from the supply should the performance of the Endowment exceed the financial model. Finally, there are potential options to further sustain the treasury that are not in scope of this SIP via protocol revenue paths that can be considered separately.

Reviewer 10: > No further treasury mints are planned beyond this endowment

Is this a promise?  As in, does this SIP constitute an amendment to SIP-000 that no subsequent SIP may be ratified if it changes the token emissions?

Reviewer: agreed with @jcnelson here - it's easy to say in a document like this that it won't happen *until it does*. i'd err on the side of caution here,  and not codify that this will not happen again because we're all terrible at predicting the future.

Reviewer 5: So it doesn't say emissions won't change, it says that new mints are planned. It's not purporting to say that it won't happen, it is simply informing readers that there are no more mints planned, which is relevant and useful information.

### **Why a new treasury?**

This capital allows Stacks to move more quickly on its mission to activate the Bitcoin economy. As crypto matures and the landscape of Bitcoin layers that Stacks founded grows, velocity is critical. The additional capital will align the ecosystem with both competitive and partner ecosystems in the space, ensuring Stacks is not left behind due to a treasury created in an entirely different landscape, which has already been leveraged extensively in growing the ecosystem over the past 6 years. It will enable the type of growth-focused activities builders need as they leverage the new speeds and security of Nakamoto and the sBTC asset launched in late 2024\. While the technology will continue to progress, the ecosystem’s top priority in 2025 is driving traction, requiring an investment in growth activities and economic flywheels, which the new structure and capital will allow for.

> > *Other ecosystems that updated their treasury operations and allocated material growth funding have successfully unlocked new products, achieved roadmap milestones, improved liquidity, and enabled real-time, transparent funding for builders-outcomes that are now considered essential for ecosystem leadership.*

Reviewer 10: Are the leading `>`'s here a copy/paste artifact?

> > *Other ecosystems that updated their treasury operations and allocated material growth funding have successfully unlocked new products, achieved roadmap milestones, improved liquidity, and enabled real-time, transparent funding for builders-outcomes that are now considered essential for ecosystem leadership.*

Reviewer 10: > Other ecosystems that updated their treasury operations and allocated material growth funding have successfully unlocked new products, achieved roadmap milestones, improved liquidity, and enabled real-time, transparent funding for builders-outcomes that are now considered essential for ecosystem leadership.

It's good to see this, but it needs to follow through on two points:

* The SIP should demonstrate for each of these projects that "unlocking new products," "achieving roadmap milestones," and "improved liquidity" could _only have been achieved by_ altering their tokenomics.  Like, were there noticeable changes in the blockchains' behaviors, token prices, and developer traction consequent to raising capital?

* The fact that this tactic worked for other peer projects is evidence that it will work for Stacks as well.

> - **Sui**: Since the announcement of its ecosystem fund worth over $50M to support its DeFi ecosystem in Q4 2023, **Sui** has seen explosive growth, with TVL increasing by \~50x, DEX volumes by \~20x, and daily active users \~15x as of Q1 2025\. The comparison shows clear growth across all key metrics, which could suggest that the initial funding helped drive ecosystem growth.
> - **Avalanche**: Since the announcement of its $180M DeFi incentive program in Q3 2021, **Avalanche** has grown steadily, with TVL increasing by \~8x, DEX volumes by \~2x, and daily active users by \~6x as of Q1 2025\. The comparison shows clear growth across all key metrics, which could suggest that the initial funding helped drive ecosystem growth.
> - **NEAR**: Since the announcement of its $800M funding initiative in Q4 2021, **NEAR** has seen significant growth, with TVL increasing by \~4x, fees by \~3x, and daily active users by \~160x as of Q1 2025\. The comparison shows clear growth across all key metrics, which could suggest that the initial funding helped drive ecosystem growth.

> ### **Treasury Impact**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Treasury Impact
```

- **Increased development activity:** Consistent funding for core protocol developers to drive development and innovation.  
- **Ecosystem growth:** Grants and incentives will attract developers, projects, and users to the Stacks ecosystem.  
- **Enhanced marketing and adoption:** Dedicated resources towards marketing will increase awareness and adoption of Stacks.  
- **Improved market dynamics:** Active treasury management and more robust capital markets activities can contribute to a healthier STX market.

### **Treasury Allocations & Usage**

> **Building for the Long Run: Roadmap and Stacks Value Accrual**

Reviewer 10: Is this meant to be a sub-heading?

Reviewer 3: I went to the author's latest branch: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/cuevasm-patch-1/sips/sip-031/sip-031.md?plain=1

found this
<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2dac7c2d-4682-4cac-bc66-398b84e34f11" width=40% height=40%>

Seems to have been changed to sub-heading. 

Resolved?

To more deeply understand the technical and growth efforts this SIP intends to support, we invite voters and stakeholders to read the following key resources:

* [Stacks Roadmap Update](https://stacksroadmap.com)  
* [Stacks Economic Model: Unlocking BTC Capital & Long Term Growth](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035)  
* [sBTC Design Principles](https://bitcoinl2labs.com/sbtc-design-principles)  
* [Stacks DeFi Growth Roadmap](https://forum.stacks.org/t/2025-roadmap-defi-road-to-1bn-defi-tvl/18032)

If approved, this SIP calls for the treasury funds to be allocated in accordance with the roadmap and other resources linked directly above. Taking a look at the top-line budget, it will be deployed across several key areas with the following approximate breakdown:

> ### **Stacks Endowment Initial Budget Allocation**

Reviewer 10: Should this be a sub-heading of "Treasury Allocations & Usage"?  Because, it's not right now.

> ### **Stacks Endowment Initial Budget Allocation**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Stacks Endowment Initial Budget Allocation
```

* **Operations and Staff: 10%** This category includes the costs to run a lean organization of employees, contractors, and other roles, as the execution responsibility folds into a new primary execution entity, as described in the next section. Operations and Staff also includes costs for custody, compliance and legal fees, recurring platform subscriptions, financial reporting, and general operating expenses. Back office consolidation is generally considered beneficial because efficiencies are realized.  

> * **Engineering and Security: 12%** The commitment to the core blockchain, sBTC, and the security model for Stacks needs ongoing funding. These funds will enable increased engineering velocity and create additional bandwidth for development work streams to happen in parallel. These funds will also be used to double down on efforts like whitehat security engagements, onboarding of leading experts like [Asymmetric Research](https://stacks.org/asymmetric-joins-stacks-ecosystem), ongoing bounty programs, audits, and much more. Importantly, these funds can also be deployed to support builders as they seek to build and remain secure \- expenses that were previously tricky for others to pay for under the current model. As the ecosystem grows, so too should its investment in engineering and security.  

Reviewer 10: Typo: "work streams"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Engineering and Security: 12%** The commitment to the core blockchain, sBTC, and the security model for Stacks needs ongoing funding. These funds will enable increased engineering velocity and create additional bandwidth for development workstreams to happen in parallel. These funds will also be used to double down on efforts like whitehat security engagements, onboarding of leading experts like [Asymmetric Research](https://stacks.org/asymmetric-joins-stacks-ecosystem), ongoing bounty programs, audits, and much more. Importantly, these funds can also be deployed to support builders as they seek to build and remain secure \- expenses that were previously tricky for others to pay for under the current model. As the ecosystem grows, so too should its investment in engineering and security.  
```

> * **Growth and Marketing: 20%** A major category requiring further investment at the ecosystem level, these funds will enable a concerted and cohesive effort to grow the Stacks brand and onboard users and developers. Contributors in this new org can freely work on ecosystem marketing efforts. This category will include a doubling down of an effective events strategy that saw Stacks exit 2024 with the \#7 fastest growing developer ecosystem, and carve out funds for new activities it has not been able to do before, such as brand marketing, collaborations with KOLs, possible learn and earn campaigns with partners, hackathons, to name a few. While these funds are primarily intended to grow the Stacks brand and overall project awareness in support of all apps, many times that will be executed on by supporting builders as they market and grow their applications.   

Reviewer 10: > This category will include a doubling down of an effective events strategy that saw Stacks exit 2024 with the \#7 fastest growing developer ecosystem,

This was the Electric Capital report, right?  Can you cite it here?

> * **Bootstrapping network growth flywheel (including grants, bounties, user incentives, business development for key integrations & partnerships, and M\&A): 31%** Distinct from marketing, bootstrapping budget covers a key category of funds that will be applied to user growth efforts both at the Stacks and application levels. As Stacks builders look to grow their applications, bootstrapping the necessary protocol/ecosystem level infrastructure is initially very expensive. This budget ensures the fundamental pieces that builders rely on ecosystems in our industry are provided, and Stacks can be even more competitive for builder talent. Industry expectations are that many of these incentives are provided by ‘the ecosystem’, meaning that investors all expect this when considering investing in Stacks startups. The primary focus of these funds is to support builders as they reach the point where they require growth incentives, and this should not only make it faster for apps to reach critical mass, but also to secure investors on the way. Importantly, this category also includes funds to support aggressive and expedited business development momentum for the Stacks chain, potential M\&As, and other activities under the ‘Business Development’ umbrella, further enabling builders with the interoperability and support their apps need to grow. Examples of spend may include integration costs for bridges, stablecoins, sBTC listings, more fiat on/off ramps, oracle and node providers, incentives for Signers, and more.  

Reviewer 10: Formatting:  Let's keep the bullet title short by moving the parenthetical out of the bolded text, and describing it in detail as part of the paragraph body.

> * **Bootstrapping network growth flywheel (including grants, bounties, user incentives, business development for key integrations & partnerships, and M\&A): 31%** Distinct from marketing, bootstrapping budget covers a key category of funds that will be applied to user growth efforts both at the Stacks and application levels. As Stacks builders look to grow their applications, bootstrapping the necessary protocol/ecosystem level infrastructure is initially very expensive. This budget ensures the fundamental pieces that builders rely on ecosystems in our industry are provided, and Stacks can be even more competitive for builder talent. Industry expectations are that many of these incentives are provided by ‘the ecosystem’, meaning that investors all expect this when considering investing in Stacks startups. The primary focus of these funds is to support builders as they reach the point where they require growth incentives, and this should not only make it faster for apps to reach critical mass, but also to secure investors on the way. Importantly, this category also includes funds to support aggressive and expedited business development momentum for the Stacks chain, potential M\&As, and other activities under the ‘Business Development’ umbrella, further enabling builders with the interoperability and support their apps need to grow. Examples of spend may include integration costs for bridges, stablecoins, sBTC listings, more fiat on/off ramps, oracle and node providers, incentives for Signers, and more.  

Reviewer 10: > Industry expectations are that many of these incentives are provided by ‘the ecosystem’, meaning that investors all expect this when considering investing in Stacks startups.

I'd recommend dropping this sentence, since:

* It's very hard to cite definitive evidence for this claim
* It suggests that the motivation of this SIP is to make Stacks more beholden to investors' needs (at the expense of users' needs)
* It distracts from the main point I think you're trying to make, which is that this treasury is meant in part to provide the needed capital to blockchain startups' initial business development needs (which happen to be somewhat more capital-intensive than the reader expects).  You could hammer this point home even harder if you can add a sentence or two describing a concrete example from the ecosystem today.

> * **Working Capital: 27%** Working capital describes capital that is intended to be actively deployed, but not permanently spent. This includes capital liquidity provisioning, a Stacks Memecoin Fund, direct deployments into Stacks DeFi, and allocations to deals that require a certain capital allocation to incentivize integration into the Stacks ecosystem.

Reviewer 10: So is this SIP committing to spending STX on memecoins?

Reviewer 5: not a hard commital, but its in the range of liquidity provisioning 
```suggestion
* **Working Capital: 27%** Working capital describes capital that is intended to be actively deployed, but not permanently spent. This may include capital liquidity provisioning, a Stacks Memecoin Fund, direct deployments into Stacks DeFi, and allocations to deals that require a certain capital allocation to incentivize integration into the Stacks ecosystem.
```

### **Benefits To Builders**

> With the majority of the Endowment dedicated to empowering builders of all sizes and fueling growth, the Stacks ecosystem is entering its next wave of innovation. To provide more specific examples, Stackers can expect to see activities like the following supported by this new endowment (in no particular order):

Reviewer 10: > the Stacks ecosystem is entering its next wave of innovation

This is unquantifiable and unfalsifiable marketing-speak.  Suggest dropping.

Reviewer 3: I think the whole SIP-031 implies it is taking the Stacks to the (wave of innovation) next level already.

And this section is really just about "_benefits to builders_", I think it would read a lot clearer for the builders if follows Jude's suggestion to remove - so I agree. 

Would read like below:

`With the majority of the Endowment dedicated to empowering builders of all sizes and fueling growth. To provide more specific examples, Stackers can expect to see activities like the following supported by this new endowment (in no particular order):`

* **Community Grants:** In addition to critical bounties (for needs identified by roadmap priorities), community engagement and marketing initiatives, and new builder recruitment/growth programs, the Endowment will create a “Community Grants” program to fund projects that may fall outside the highest current/ immediate ecosystem priorities, but still widely benefit the community. These projects are conceived and created by members of the Stacks Community to benefit the growth, creation of resources, or general betterment of the Stacks Community (such as media programs, art projects, free/open source tooling, or similar). The Community Grants program will be administered by the operational entity, who will be responsible for creating a public site where community members can submit applications and vote on proposed grants, with final allocations made by direct vote of the Treasury Committee (or a sub-committee they may set up).

> * **DeFi liquidity programs** and support for new projects (including direct deployments into Stacks DeFi): *The Endowment will deploy capital to boost liquidity on Stacks DeFi platforms and provide crucial early-stage support for innovative DeFi projects.

Reviewer 10: > *The Endowment

Typo: extra *

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **DeFi liquidity programs** and support for new projects (including direct deployments into Stacks DeFi): The Endowment will deploy capital to boost liquidity on Stacks DeFi platforms and provide crucial early-stage support for innovative DeFi projects.
```

> * **Brand campaigns and KOL engagement:** *Strategic marketing initiatives will raise awareness of Stacks and sBTC and drive user adoption by highlighting key value propositions and use cases.

Reviewer 10: Typo: extra * again

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Brand campaigns and KOL engagement:** Strategic marketing initiatives will raise awareness of Stacks and sBTC and drive user adoption by highlighting key value propositions and use cases.
```

* **Exchange listings (SIP-010 standard), capital markets activities, and ecosystem TGE liquidity:** The Endowment will support STX and sBTC liquidity on exchanges and help facilitate successful token generation events (TGEs) for new projects launching within the Stacks ecosystem by pursing SIP-010 standard integrations on major exchanges, thereby removing friction for teams, and facilitating the necessary introductions. 
* **Marketing, education, and user acquisition:** Educational programs and user acquisition campaigns will help new users understand and engage with the Stacks ecosystem, driving growth and adoption.
* **Business development, partnerships, and M\&A:** The Endowment will actively pursue strategic partnerships and business development opportunities to expand the reach and influence of the Stacks ecosystem. Examples may include stablecoins, bridges, onramps, and other critical partnerships.* 
* **Other initiatives as identified by the community and Treasury Committee:** A portion of the Endowment will remain flexible to address emerging needs and support innovative ideas that are identified by the community.

> ### **Endowment Creation & Specifications**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Endowment Creation & Specifications
```

> The endowment will be created primarily via new emissions from the Stacks network over the next five years. This emissions design was created to ensure that the new Endowment had sufficient resources to fund the necessary activities and build a healthy endowment base, all while maintaining a lower overall inflation rate than the majority of Top 50 crypto ecosystems (which currently have a median of \~10%, further details are below).

Reviewer 10: This text uses "Top 50" in a few places.  Can you add a list of these projects as an appendix, so there can be no ambiguity as to which projects these are?  Asking because projects can rise and fall out of favor, which makes this term ill-defined for future readers.

Reviewer 5: I'm seeing a PDF in the repo now so I think it has been?

Reviewer 10: Yes, thank you

To fund the initial working capital, such as that needed for deployment in liquidity operations, applications, BD allocations, and similar,

1. 25M STX (or equivalent other currencies) transfers from the Stacks Foundation, Hiro, Muneeb Ali, Stacks Asia Foundation, Bitcoin L2 Labs, and others. These are existing tokens and do not result in new emissions.  
2. 100M STX will be created via a one-time token mint, immediately upon implementation of the SIP \- while immediately unlocked and usable, these tokens will be used for working capital and will not be released to the open market.

The rest of the Endowment will be created via new emissions over a 60-month period.

Of these new emissions,

1. The first 100M STX will be minted as locked and will unlock over the first 24 months with 1/24th unlocking each month \- these tokens will also not come to the open market but rather will be sold while locked via OTC/private placements with 12-36 month lockups in order to raise the initial USD operational capital for the Endowment.  

> 2. The majority (300M STX) of these new emissions will be emitted over the course of 60 months at each PoX tenure anchor block. These new tokens will be minted and deposited directly to the Treasury address (similar to, but distinct from, coinbase rewards). The specific schedule is:  

Reviewer 5: The idea here was to smooth the creation/distribution of tokens as much as possible, hence each 10 minutes instead of every 2 weeks (which is what I assume you mean by "first tenure in the reward cycle") but if its safer to go with the later route I think that could be discussed. Can you say more about the technicals there?

> 2. The majority (300M STX) of these new emissions will be emitted over the course of 60 months at each PoX tenure anchor block. These new tokens will be minted and deposited directly to the Treasury address (similar to, but distinct from, coinbase rewards). The specific schedule is:  

Reviewer 10: Oh I see.  The text had me confused -- you're saying that every tenure, some new STX will be emitted (i.e. once every Bitcoin block instead of once every reward cycle).  I think that's great :+1:  Can the text be updated to say "each tenure-start block (i.e. once per Bitcoin block)" instead, to clarify this?

   1. **Months 1-11:** 475 STX per anchor block  
   2. **Months 12-23:** 1,140 STX per anchor block  
   3. **Months 24-35:** 1,705 STX per anchor block  
   4. **Months 36-47:** 1,305 STX per anchor block  
   5. **Months 48-60:** 1,155 STX per anchor block

> The Endowment will maintain and publish a primary mint address that all funds will flow to before being deployed. There are potential options to further sustain the treasury that are not in scope of this SIP via protocol revenue paths that can be considered separately, but there are not further treasury mints beyond this endowment. See [Stacks Economic Model](https://forum.stacks.org/t/stacks-economic-model-unlocking-bitcoin-capital-long-term-growth/18035) for more details.

Reviewer 10: > The Endowment will maintain and publish a primary mint address 

This address will be a smart contract address, right?  Asking because the keys controlling the funds are expected to rotate.

Reviewer 10: If it has been discussed, I haven't been party to it.

I'll address this in a PR-level comment.

Reviewer: can confirm it has been discussed, and the proposed solution should be added here (with the inclusion of the technical CAB to evaluate).

Reviewer: tech specs have been added and are bring worked though. resolving this

**Inflation Impact**

Nomiks’ proposed emissions and conversion programs were designed with the goal of keeping Stacks’ annual inflation (including the existing coinbase reward for miners) below that of most other Top 50 projects, which have a median inflation rate of **10.18%**, as seen on [this sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1pwZtoU4E6RXXxCw9gW225TJnD4W_Xu3B2WGhqe21O9o/edit?usp=sharing).

Given that current PoX inflation rates are 3.52%, the goal is to have Stacks remain below **7%** average annual inflation from all sources (both mining and new emissions combined) over the next 5 years, which is well below the **10%** of other ecosystems from above.

Not including the initial mint, the total inflation rate for each of the 5 years of emissions and unlocks is as follows:

| Year | Total STX Emissions (incl Treasury & PoX) |
| --- | --- |
| Year 1 | 7% |
| Year 2 | 7% |
| Year 3 | 7% |
| Year 4 | 4.25% |
| Year 5 | 3.50% |
| Average Yearly Emissions | 5.75% |

Once the minting is complete, annual inflation for STX will be \<2%.

> 📈 The full report from Nomiks can be seen **[here](https://forum.stacks.org/uploads/short-url/pgKEv8ljXuWpCC1GnkyIi3pD8SV.pdf)**

> **Future Token Burns**: The rate of emissions in this SIP were chosen based on the third party economic analysis and to ensure that the Endowment raised sufficient funds  even in a scenario where the token price does not considerably rise. Therefore, it is possible that if STX materially overperforms the model in the economic report in the short to mid-term (for instance if it rose to $10+ /token), then the Endowment will likely be sufficiently equipped without needing all of the planned emissions and a token burn can be set up to burn the later part of the emissions. This will also depend on the performance of some of the value accrual mechanisms (like sBTC gas fees) that would provide more funds that could be used for burns.

Reviewer 10: Because this SIP promised earlier not to change the token emission schedule, then this text implies that the treasury keyholders will be responsible for burning the extra STX, right?

Reviewer 5: Most likely yes, the exact implementation would need to be chosen based on what the plan is, but a new SIP could also be run to change the schedule itself

Reviewer 10: That's fine with me.  I think the SIP should say this though, so this responsibility is clearly understood by each member of the Treasury Committee.

As such, if the size of the Endowment’s total liquid assets grows to exceed $1b USD, it will devise a burn program and present that program to the community for a vote, along with other options for the community to select from, including continuing to grow the Endowment or allocation of the future tokens to other purposes.

> ### **Treasury Strategy & Operations**: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Treasury Strategy & Operations
```

**Enhanced Financial Flexibility**: The creation of a Stacks Endowment brings greater financial flexibility to the ecosystem, moving beyond the constraints of previous token sales. This structure enables more effective financial planning and strategic resource allocation.

In contrast to many current contributors, the new funding entity is designed to respond freely to the ecosystem’s evolving needs, supporting a broader range of initiatives as they arise.

**Predictable STX Management for Market Stability**: This new treasury structure brings greater stability and predictability to the market environment for STX holders. The Stacks Endowment will publish a forward-looking STX deployment schedule, clearly communicating the timing and amounts of STX allocations. By proactively sharing this information, the Endowment reduces uncertainty and builds confidence \- an approach proven effective by other leading projects. Such transparency is especially valuable for those seeking long-term stability and growth within the Stacks ecosystem.

> ### **Stacks Endowment: Organization, Structure, and Governance**: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Stacks Endowment: Organization, Structure, and Governance
```

The Stacks Endowment will be organized and governed according to best practices established by leading public non-profits and endowments. Day-to-day operations will be managed by a small, professional team, while major decisions and allocations will be ratified by a Treasury Committee that remains directly accountable to the Stacks community.

> Upon approval, the principles and structural details outlined in this SIP will be formally adopted into the legal bylaws governing the Stacks Endowment. The community will retain the ability to propose amendments to the Endowment’s personnel, structure, or governance at any time through future SIPs.

Reviewer 10: I think this is a great feature, and should probably be mentioned earlier with respect to how this SIP is meant to preserve decentralization.

Of course, it also remains committed to the deepest levels of compliance while seeking to provide the maximum protection and clarity possible to all stakeholders and contributors by following current legal best practices. This proposed structure has been developed in line with the best practices from the last 5+ years of legal and financial experience in the crypto industry.

## **Current issues for key contributors**

There are a number of key factors that make it difficult for key contributors to operate in support of the Stacks Ecosystem. These factors are primarily a result of Stacks’ compliance journey in the US. They can be traced back to the initial path to decentralization that the project committed to as it became the first project to ever hold an SEC-qualified sale.

These commitments imposed limitations on organizations like the Stacks Foundation, Hiro, and others, adding complexity, friction, and sometimes preventing them from directly supporting important aspects of ecosystem growth.

This SIP, by establishing the new entity plus the required capital, solves that, providing capital and the vehicle essential to deploying it flexibly for years to come.

> ## **Ecosystem Structure: Roles and Responsibilities**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ecosystem Structure: Roles and Responsibilities
```

To ensure clarity and optimize operations, this SIP calls for three primary organizations with distinct responsibilities. These organizations will comprise a mix of established contributors from the primary organizations seeding capital and new hires.

> ## **Proposed Ecosystem Structure**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Proposed Ecosystem Structure
```

**1\. Allocation / Money: The Stacks Endowment**

* **Focus:** Management of the Stacks Endowment, strategic fund allocation, and financial stewardship.  
* **Responsibilities:**  
  * Manage a diversified portfolio of assets (STX, BTC, USD) held within the Stacks Endowment.  
  * Manage grants programs and provide technical support for ecosystem projects.  
  * Review and approve funding proposals from the Ops Entity, ecosystem community projects, and other initiatives.  
  * Oversee risk management, compliance, and audit processes for the Treasury.

> **2\. Day-to-Day Execution: A New Operational Entity**

Reviewer 10: Because this entity is funded by the endowment, is it a wholly-owned subsidiary?  Also, I take it that a future SIP could, in theory, cut off the new entity from endowment funding (or divert it to other entities)?

Reviewer 5: It is not a subsidiary, moreso a contractor - and yes a future SIP could change where tokens go

Reviewer 10: Thanks. This informs a PR-level comment I had below.

**The proposed structure offers several key advantages:**

* **Consolidated Resource Management:** Consolidating the treasury within the Stacks Endowment ensures efficient allocation of funds to the most critical needs of the ecosystem.  
* **Strategic Funding:** Allocating funds across operations, engagement, growth, incentives, and working capital enables a balanced approach to ecosystem development.  
* **Long-Term Sustainability:** Managing the treasury with a diversified portfolio provides financial stability and ensures the availability of resources for ongoing initiatives.  
* **Clear Responsibilities:** Defining the roles and responsibilities of the Stacks Endowment and its relationship with other organizations, such as the new operational entity, clarifies accountability and promotes efficient collaboration.

This clear division of responsibilities allows each group to focus on its core competencies, leading to a more efficient, effective, and sustainable ecosystem for Stacks. The Endowment staff will prepare an annual public report detailing how the Endowment's resources were allocated for the prior year and the impact of those allocations.

> ### **Impact on key contributing organizations**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Impact on key contributing organizations
```

For known organizations, it is useful to reflect on expected changes that would go with this proposal:

**Remains independent:**
* **Stacks Foundation** \- As noted above, the Stacks Foundation will narrow its focus on facilitating Governance of the ecosystem (in particular via the SIP process) and ensuring the community’s voice is heard.  
* **Hiro Systems** \- Hiro will continue as an independent entity focusing on developer tooling.  
* **Trust Machines \-** Trust Machines will continue to incubate and develop applications for Stacks & Bitcoin.  
* **Bitcoin Frontier Fund (formerly Stacks Accelerator)** \- No impact or changes.

**Likely to become part of, or share back-office resources:**
* **Bitcoin L2 Labs** \- Given the current focus of Bitcoin L2 Labs on core development, it will likely become part of the new operational entity, with Adriano continuing to lead engineering efforts.  
* **Stacks Asia Foundation** \- Stacks Asia Foundation will continue its Asia-specific focus, likely integrating back-office operations after exploring the logistics more deeply.

> ## Governance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Governance
```

**Ecosystem Reputational Risk:** There is much debate in the crypto industry over the appropriateness of changing the rates of emissions, particularly among the Bitcoin community. While Stacks is intended as a gas token for operating the network, there is the possibility that the ecosystem will receive criticism or attack for creating a treasury via emissions after the mainnet launch.

**Appearance of Centralization:** Creating a single Endowment may also be interpreted as being overly centralized. To mitigate this, the structure proposed in this SIP is designed to maintain decentralized governance around the key aspects of control and require clear, accountable reporting to the community.

**Stacks Unique Position:** While many other ecosystems have changed emissions schedules or created treasuries to fund growth, there is no exact 1:1 corollary we can look to of an ecosystem with Stacks’ unique history and position in the market to predict how this will ultimately be viewed. This is an inherent risk of making a bold attempt at something.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Conclusion

To close, the following section highlights the anticipated benefits of this proposal and identifies key areas that will require further development and focus if this SIP moves forward.

> ### **Summary of benefits**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary of benefits
```

still part of the specification

**🛠 Builders**

* Dedicated funding for growth, user acquisition  
* Increased marketing support for Stacks ecosystem  
* More ecosystem funds for broadly beneficial integrations, like bridges, oracles, stablecoins, etc.  
* Dedicated grants for core protocol, apps, tooling, and infrastructure development.  
* Access to liquidity support for early-stage Stacks-based projects  
* Direct incentives for user acquisition and application growth (e.g., TVL programs)  
* Marketing and branding resources to help amplify applications  
* Technical assistance and subsidized audits or security services  
* Faster go-to-market enablement via ecosystem-wide BizDev and GTM teams.  
* Predictable and open access to proposal funding via the Treasury Committee.  
* Confidence that Stacks is positioned to compete with top ecosystems  
* Higher velocity of Stacks network improvements, functionality, and releases

> **📈 Holders / Investors**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Holders / Investors
```

* Clear market signaling and transparency from forward-looking STX allocation schedules.  
* Improved STX market liquidity and dynamics via increased capital markets support.  
* Robust treasury management programs  
* Increased project visibility and activity, driving ecosystem growth, demand, and network functionality for STX.  
* Dedicated sBTC and DeFi growth efforts create new demand drivers for Stacks  
* Expanded developer ecosystem increases long-term value accrual potential  
* Predictable inflation schedule with consolidated dilution, aligned across contributors.  
* Puts Stacks resources more in line with other top ecosystems \- examples like Uniswap, Optimism, and Arbitrum have shown that treasuries can drive significant value.

> **🧑‍💻 Users**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Users
```

* Examples like the Optimism Foundation show how consolidated treasuries empower execution.

**🤝 Key Partners (Exchanges, Custodians, Oracles, Wallets, and Other Infra Participants)**

* Clear points of contact thanks to consolidation for execution and technical operations.  
* Faster integration timelines due to a unified core team responsible for protocol upgrades, support, and testing.  
* Improved reliability and confidence in roadmap delivery via public commitments and long-term funding.  
* Dedicated support for integrations (e.g., funding for dev time, audits, or infrastructure deployment).  
* Expanded market activity from treasury-backed growth campaigns (e.g., new STX/sBTC listings, liquidity incentives).  
* Lower organizational complexity when negotiating integration, marketing, or technical agreements.  
* Active liquidity and incentive support to boost usage post-integration (especially valuable for exchanges and wallets).  
* Stronger long-term alignment between infrastructure partners and ecosystem growth priorities.  
* Greater brand lift as Stacks expands visibility and market cap, helping partners benefit from being early or core participants.

> **📦 Casual Holders**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Casual Holders
```

* Predictable emissions and inflation are aligned with long-term growth.  
* Confidence that the ecosystem is addressing past inefficiencies and growing responsibly.  
* Improved app and protocol quality through funded security, liquidity, and dev support.  
* Trust in long-term alignment from professional treasury operations and public reporting.

### **Immediate Action Post-SIP (if approved)**

* The legal formation of both entities will be completed within 60 days of SIP approval. The research for this proposal has resulted in a significant head start on these requirements.  
* The Appointments Committee will fill the remaining seats based on community nominations, opening these nominations within 60 days of SIP approval.  
* Leadership searches for the Stacks Endowment (CIO) and operational entity (CEO) will commence, with positions posted publicly within 60 days.  
* The new operational entity, in collaboration with the Stacks Endowment and Stacks Builders will finalize details of a retroactive grants program that will focus on growth, enabling predictable capital relative to measurable impact to the ecosystem, such as user, TVL, or other growth indicators.  

> * Grant applications for critical work in the very short term will be opened by the Stacks Endowment, likely leveraging support from the Stacks Foundation’s team and systems. The goal of these grants is to serve any short-term critical needs or opportunities in the initial 90 days of the Endowment's existence until a more formal program can be deployed, including the aforementioned retroactive grant program.

Reviewer 5: yes, move into Activation

## **Activation**

Users can vote to approve this SIP with either their locked/stacked STX or with unlocked/liquid STX, or both. The SIP voting page can be found at [stx.eco](https://stx.eco/). The criteria for the stacker and non-stacker voting is as follows.

**To Vote:**

In line with prior SIPs, in order for this SIP to activate, the following criteria must be met:

* At least 80 million stacked STX must vote, with at least 80% of all stacked STX committed by voting must be in favor of the proposal (vote "yes").  
* At least 80% of all liquid STX committed by voting must be in favor of the proposal (vote "yes").

All STX holders vote by sending Stacks dust to the corresponding Stacks address from the account where their Stacks are held (stacked or liquid). To simplify things, users can create their votes by visiting the [stx.eco](https://stx.eco/) platform. Voting power is determined by a snapshot of the amount of STX (stacked and unstacked) at the block height at which the voting started (preventing the same STX from being transferred between accounts and used to effectively double vote).

> Solo stackers only can also vote by sending a bitcoin dust transaction (6000 sats) to the corresponding bitcoin address.

Reviewer 10: Also, this SIP is missing its Related Work section (but the meat of it is here; it just needs to be factored out)

> Solo stackers only can also vote by sending a bitcoin dust transaction (6000 sats) to the corresponding bitcoin address.

Reviewer: @mijoco-btc can you share some details here?

> Solo stackers only can also vote by sending a bitcoin dust transaction (6000 sats) to the corresponding bitcoin address.

Reviewer 5: TO DO: Add addresses from stx.eco

> Solo stackers only can also vote by sending a bitcoin dust transaction (6000 sats) to the corresponding bitcoin address.

Reviewer 5: This has been added as part of this commit
https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/214/commits/1a434c489621f15698c182051e27f3e106a272b2

**Stacks Foundation Governance Allocation**
To ensure that the Stacks Foundation always has sufficient resources to provide its governance role in the ecosystem, the Endowment shall provide up to $500K USD per year (indexed to inflation) in funding for governance activities at the discretion of the Stacks Foundation. This dedicated funding will sustain the core Stacks Improvement Proposal (SIP) processes that ensure community oversight and transparency. It includes resourcing SIP Deputies, Working Groups and/or the CAB, supporting SIP education and SIP editor development, funding SIP engagement bounties and enabling neutral SIP coordination by the Stacks Foundation. The allocation will also support the development and ongoing refinement of bylaws to guide Endowment governance, ensuring strategic decisions reflect the collective will of the community and foster long-term trust and alignment across the Stacks ecosystem. Providing the mechanisms by which community leaders can create, refine, and move proposals forward.

A new Epoch 3.2 will manage the emission of the new tokens and its schedule.

To facilitate mints and transfers, Epoch 3.2 relies on a boot contract exposing:

> A public function update-principal that allows setting the current-principal. The principal set in this smart contract will elect the recipient of the initial 100M STX (minted at epoch transition), the recipient of the unlockings for the second 100M STX over 24 months, and the recipient of the 300M STX transferred over 60 months (at each tenure). 

Reviewer: committed on behalf of @MarvinJanssen

A read-only function get-principal returning the current principal (set with update-principal)

> A read-only function get-original-principal, returning the principal that received the mint of 100M STX (locked and unlocking over 24 months).

Reviewer: committed on behalf of @MarvinJanssen

A public function, unlock-at-bitcoin-height, that given a bitcoin height returns non-zero if any amount unlocks (over the 24 months phase). 

```clarity
(define-public (update-principal (new-principal principal) (response bool uint))
(define-read-only (get-principal) (response principal uint))
(define-read-only (get-original-principal) (response principal uint))
(define-public (unlock-at-bitcoin-height (bitcoin-height uint) (response (tuple (original principal) (recipient principal)) uint)))
```

This design allows the principal that will receive funds during the 5 years cycle to change (e.g., in case of a rotation in the treasury committee), while keeping the smart contract extremely simple to reduce potential attack surface and implementation complexity.

> When instantiated on mainnet, current-principal will be a 3 out of 5 multisig, deterministically generated starting from the public keys of the 5 treasury signers. 

Reviewer: committed on behalf of @MarvinJanssen

100M STX unlocking in 24 iterations
At epoch transition (activation), 100M STX will be minted and transferred to the recipient resulting from the get-principal call of contract, where they will remain locked. 

The principal who received the mint will be stored in the contract (as the “original principal”, retrievable with get-original-principal). 

Every 4383 Bitcoin blocks, a contract call will check if the current bitcoin height matches an unlock iteration using the unlock-at-bitcoin-height function. If this call returns a non-error, then the result contains two principals: original and recipient. 

If they match, an unlock of 1/24th of the funds will be applied;
if they differ, a transfer to the recipient will be accomplished too (this will allow to change the recipients of the unlocking process at any time). 

In addition to minting, locking will generate a receipt for the coinbase transaction as well as the (eventual) unlock-and-transfer.
300M STX over 60 months

> At each tenure start, the amount of STX detailed below will be minted and transferred to the recipient resulting from the get-principal call of contract (1) above. Each transfer will produce a corresponding receipt.

Reviewer: committed on behalf of @MarvinJanssen
